# ga10_1982 Case 5 — Complaint of the Session of the Peace Congregation, Cary, North Carolina, agains

## Complaint

Complaint of the Session of the Peace Congregation, Cary, North Carolina, against the Presbytery of Eastern Carolina


We, the undersigned, the Session of Peace Presbyterian Church (Cary, NC), hereby complain against a decision of Eastern Carolina Presbytery. Our complaint is:

That at its stated meeting, May 22, 1982, Eastern Carolina Presbytery refused to rescind a resolution which we believe goes beyond Scripture in defining the Christian lifestyle and which, therefore, is contrary to the Westminster Confession of Faith, Chapter 20-2, which forbids binding the conscience by the commands of men. The resolution, adopted January 26, 27, 1979, concludes:

“Eastern Carolina Presbytery affirms its considered opinion voluntary total abstinence from the use of all alcoholic beverages is the proper life style for a Christian today. The Presbytery, therefore, calls upon its Teaching and Ruling Elders to adhere to this position in their personal practice, and calls upon its Sessions to encourage the members of their churches to adhere to this position in their personal practice.” (Minutes of Presbytery, Jan. 26, 27, 1979, pp. 4,5, #29—See Document A)

The inconsistency of this resolution with Scripture and with the decisions of the 7th and 8th General Assemblies were presented in our letter to the Sessions of Presbytery requesting that the resolution be rescinded (document B).

In evaluating this complaint, we believe General Assembly should keep in mind that it was this Presbytery which overturned the General Assembly twice on this matter. Following the clear statement of the 8th Assembly that it would be improper to adopt a statement for total abstinence, Presbytery appointed a special study committee which recommended rescinding the resolution. That motion lost (Minutes of Presbytery, May 23, 1981, p. 4, #26—See document C) as did the latest one by our Session.

We respectfully request General Assembly to correct Eastern Carolina Presbytery on this issue, on which they have repeatedly refused to correct themselves.

Session, Peace Presbyterian Church
JAMES K. WORKMAN, TE
JAMES S. BUS, RE
MARVIN D. HUISMAN, RE
DANIEL J. PRINS, RE
JOSEPH C. HAMMOND, RE

Adjudicated §10-79, p. 109.

## Adjudication (§10‑79)

REPORT OF THE JUDICIAL COMMISSION ON COMPLAINT OF JAMES K. WORKMAN
ET AL., AGAINST THE PRESBYTERY OF EASTERN CAROLINA

TE James M. Bowen, Jr., Chairman of the Commission to adjudicate Case #5, presented the report. It was approved and accepted as the action and judgment of the General Assembly in the case, and ordered entered into the Minutes.

James K. Workman, et al., as members
of The Session of Peace Presbyterian

COMPLAINANTS


<!-- PAGE ga=10 pdf_page=112 printed_page=null -->

Church, Cary, North Carolina
vs.
Eastern Carolina Presbytery
RESPONDENT

## STATEMENT OF FACTS

The pertinent facts, which are without dispute, are as follows:

1. On January 26/27, 1979, Eastern Carolina Presbytery overtured the Seventh General Assembly asking for a deliverance in these words: “Be it resolved by the General Assembly in an *in thesi* deliverance that total abstinence from alcoholic beverages, except in medicinal use, be the approved position of our denomination on this matter.”

2. On January 26/27, 1979, Eastern Carolina Presbytery adopted the following resolution: “Eastern Carolina Presbytery affirms it’s considered opinion that voluntary total abstinence from the use of all alcoholic beverages is the proper life style for a Christian today. The Presbytery, therefore, calls upon it’s Teaching and Ruling Elders to adhere to this position in their personal practice, and calls upon its Sessions to encourage the members of their churches to adhere to this position in their personal practice. Motion carried: 9 for to 5 against.”

3. On June 18 - 22, 1979, the General Assembly refused to receive the overture of Eastern Carolina Presbytery (M7GA, p.92).

4. On January 26, 1980, Eastern Carolina Presbytery renewed its overture to the Eighth General Assembly asking for the same *in thesi* deliverance.

5. On June 16 - 20, 1980, the Eighth General Assembly answered this overture in the negative on the grounds that “to adopt a position of total abstinence would go beyond the requirements of Scripture, (Deut. 5:32, 33: Col. 2:20-23) and is contrary to the Westminster Confession of Faith, (Chapter 20. sub-paragraph 2), which forbids the binding of the conscience by the commands of men.” The Assembly further adopted a statement recognizing the problem of the abuse of alcoholic beverages and encouraging local churches to teach and counsel in this area (M8GA, p. 98).

6. At the May 23, 1981, meeting of the Eastern Carolina Presbytery on recommendation from a Special Committee to study the beverage use of alcohol, a motion was made and seconded to rescind the January 26/27, 1979, resolution. The motion lost by 8 for and 9 against.

7. On April 28, 1982, James K. Workman, et al., as members of the Session of Peace Presbyterian Church, Cary, North Carolina, wrote to the Sessions of Eastern Carolina Presbytery informing them that at the next stated meeting of Presbytery they planned to ask Presbytery to rescind the January 26/27, 1979, resolution. The letter argued that the resolution as an expression of a church court goes farther than Scripture in defining “the proper life style for a Christian today,” and cited the actions of the 7th General Assembly in refusing to receive an overture from Eastern Carolina Presbytery on this matter and the 8th General Assembly in refusing to declare that total abstinence is “the approved position of the denomination.”

8. On May 22, 1982, at the meeting of Eastern Carolina Presbytery, a motion was made and seconded to rescind the January 26/27, 1979, resolution. The motion lost 5-12.

9. On May 25, 1982, James K. Workman, et. al. entered their complaint against Eastern Carolina Presbytery with the Tenth General Assembly.

## STATEMENT OF ISSUE

Does the Resolution of the Eastern Carolina Presbytery as cited in Complaint #5 work to bind the conscience of teaching and ruling elders and members of churches and thereby go beyond Scripture and the Westminster Confession of Faith?

## EXPLANATORY OPINION

1. The Eighth General Assembly dealt with the general question of total abstinence from alcoholic beverages (M8GA, p. 32; overture 11 from the Eastern Carolina Presbytery). We believe this action of the Assembly (M8GA, p. 98, paragraph 4a) addresses the matter in a wise, prudent and Biblical fashion.

2. Members of the commission would feel bound by the resolution in its present form, if they were members of the Eastern Carolina Presbytery; therefore, they believe the consciences of members of the court are in practice bound by it.

## JUDGEMENT

It is therefore ordered, adjudged, and decreed by the Judicial Commission that the complaint of James K. Workman, et al., as members of the Session of Peace Presbyterian Church, Cary, North Carolina,


<!-- PAGE ga=10 pdf_page=113 printed_page=null -->

against the Eastern Carolina Presbytery be sustained.

All members of the commission concur. No dissents.

JAMES BOWEN

(CHAIRMAN)

CARL W. ZUIKLEY

(SECRETARY)

## APPENDAGE

The commission understands and applauds the desire of the Eastern Carolina Presbytery to provide guidance in the pursuit of godliness by its members and churches in matters of morality, ethics, and testimony. We suggest that the Presbytery should study well and pray over the guidance provided by the 8th General Assembly as expressed in paragraph 4b (1), (2), and (3) on page 98 in the Minutes of that Assembly. The sin of intemperance in all it's forms should be resisted vigorously by all Christians, and we believe that the Eighth General Assembly correctly outlined how that should be done.

The commission wishes to commend both Complainant and Respondent for the Christian manner displayed in their presentations.

Adopted

