# GA20 O41 — Establish Ad Interim Committee to Plan 350th Anniversary of WCF

**Assembly:** 20th (1992)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 41 From Northeast Presbytery (See 20-25,2, p. 79)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered in the negative

*Source: [ga20_1992 p. 61](../markdown/ga20_1992.md#ga20-p61)*

---

"Establish Ad Interim Committee to Plan 350th Anniversary of WCF" COMMUNICATIONS COMMUNICATION 1 From Grace Presbytery (to MNA) "Concur with Overture 13 from Louisiana to Divide" (See 20-23, 3, p. 74) COMMUNICATION 2 From Westminster Theological Seminary (to AC) "Appoint Observer to Westminster Theological Seminary Board” (See 20-63, VI, 11, p. 132) COMMUNICATION 3 From the Orthodox Presbyterian Church (to IRC) "Consider Merger, not J & R" (See 20-22, III, 1, p. 63) COMMUNICATION 4 From Westminster Presbyterian Synod, Australia "Thanks for Relation Through MTW; Request Fraternal Relationship" (to IRC) (See 20-22,11, p. 66) COMMUNICATION 5 From the Reformed Presbyterian Church of India "Greetings to the 20th General Assembly of the PCA, 1992” (to IRC) (See 20-22, 11, p. 66) COMMUNICATION 6 From the Evangelical Free Church in America "Greetings" (to IRC) (See 20-22, 11, p. 68) 20-14 ad interim committee on divorce and remarriage TE Paul Fowler, chairman, led in prayer and began presentation of the Committee's report (see Appendix O, pp. 513). The members of the Committee joined him at the podium. Chairman Fowler noted several minor changes which will be included in the final published text of the report. Recommendations were acted upon as follows: 1. That the General Assembly receive the report of the Ad-Interim Committee on Divorce and Remarriage. Adopted 2. That the General Assembly adopt the following conclusions regarding divorce and remarriage: a. That according to both the institution of marriage and its regulation in Scripture, marital vows are to be kept until death. Adopted b. That nevertheless, Scripture does provide for the dissolution of marriage under certain circumstances. Adopted c. That the innocent spouse is free to divorce and remarry when the other spouse commits sexual immorality (porneia, Mt. 19:9), in the sense understood in the Committee report (Chapter 2, Section II.D.3.f.). Adopted - **d.** That while divorce is permitted to the innocent spouse, divorce is not mandated in the case of porneia, however, and forgiveness is always to be offered to the one who has sinned (cf., e.g., Mt. 6:12,14, 15). Adopted - **e.** That when believers divorce for other than Biblical grounds, they should remain unmarried or else be reconciled (1 Cor. 7:11). Adopted - **f.** That when an unbeliever separates from the marriage relationship with a believer, the believer is free from that marriage and free to remarry but only in the Lord (1 Cor. 7:15, 39). Adopted - **g.** That under extreme circumstances, a Session may properly judge that such desertion (separation) has occurred, even though the deserting spouse is still physically present in the home ("desertion" being viewed in the sense understood in the Committee report, Chapter 2, Section ILEA). Adopted h. That the believer in the aforementioned cases (f, g) is free to make the Biblical divorce a legal divorce in the eyes of the State. Adopted i. That in matters pertaining to sexual immorality and desertion, the pastor and Ruling Elders are responsible for providing counsel, direction and judgment, according to the Scriptures and the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America. Adopted 3. That the General Assembly propose the revision of 24.6 of the Confession (which could be construed as too lax at this point, but is otherwise neither too lax or too restrictive) for clarity's sake to provide a more explicit statement of the Pauline teaching by means of the following amendment: - **a.** Add after the word "desertion" the words "of a believer by an unbeliever," and - **b.** Add as the concluding words of the section the sentence: "Believers who separate for reasons other than adultery must remain unmarried, or else be reconciled." The present wording of 24.6 reads as follows: "Although the corruption of man be such as is apt to study arguments unduly to put asunder those whom God hath joined together in marriage: yet, nothing but adultery, or such wilful desertion as can no way be remedied by the Church, or civil magistrate, is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of marriage: wherein, a public and orderly course of proceeding is to be observed; and the persons concerned in it not left to their own wills, and discretion, in their own case.” Defeated NOTE: Recommendation 3 - By the required two-thirds majority which was also more than one-half of the registered commissioners, the Assembly on motion voted to suspend the Rules of Assembly Operations requiring referral of proposed changes to the Constitution to the Committee on Constitutional Business. The recommendation was then Defeated, due to failure to achieve the required three-fourths majority (392 affirmative 283 negative). 4. That the General Assembly present to ruling and teaching elders for their careful consideration the guidelines and resources provided in Chapter 3, "Pastoral Perspective on Divorce and Remarriage." Adopted 5. That the Ad Interim Committee on Divorce and Remarriage be dismissed with gratitude. Adopted During the preceding discussion the stated clerk announced that the enrollment had increased to 387 ruling elders and 713 teaching elders for a total of 1100. 20*15 Committee on Thanks Moderator Benton announced the appointment of the Committee on Thanks: TE Henry Bishop, chairman, and RE's Ben Rook and Daniel Domin. 20-16 Worship The Assembly moved to the order of the day for worship under the direction of Northeast Presbytery. WELCOME AND ANNOUNCEMENTS TE Frank J. Smith, Senior Pastor, Affirmation PCA, Bedford Hills, New York ♦THE CALL TO WORSHIP ♦THE INVOCATION TE Brad Evans, Pastor, Presbyterian Church of Coventry, Connecticut ♦HYMN 59 "Forever Settled in the Heavens" THE OLD TESTAMENT READING Psalm 119:97-112 TE William S. Henderson, Senior Pastor, Hope Church, Ballston Spa, New York THE NEW TESTAMENT READING Matthew 5:13-20 TE John L. Vance, Pastor, Westminster PCA, Rock Tavem, New York THE SERMON "Christian Influences" TE Frank E. Smith, Associate Pastor, Affirmation PCA, Bedford Hills, New York PRAYER ♦HYMN 558 "That Man Is Blest Who, Fearing God" ♦THE BENEDICTION ♦Congregation will please stand. 20-17 Recess Following worship the Assembly recessed for lunch at 12:10 p.m. MINUTES-TUESDAY AFTERNOON June 16,1992 Third Session 20-18 Assembly Reconvened The Assembly reconvened at 1:35 p.m. Tuesday afternoon with the singing of "We Are God's People" and prayer led by TE Fred Mau. 20-19 ad interim committee on divorce and remarriage The Assembly returned to the conclusion of the Committee’s report, and recommendations 4 and 5 were acted upon at this time (text appears at 20-13, p. 59) 20-20 BCO Amendment, Item 6 The stated clerk reported concerning Item 6 of the proposed amendments to the Book of Church Order. Eastern Carolinas, South Texas, and Westminster Presbyteries had not voted to reconsider before voting again on Item 6, thus their changed votes were out of order. Northern Illinois Presbytery had voted to reconsider and its changed vote was therefore in order. Rocky Mountain Presbytery should not have voted as that in effect gave two votes to its members who had belonged to an antecedent presbytery which had voted. The count was therefore 32 affirmative, 16 negative, and 1 abstention, and the matter was ruled not before the Assembly due to failure to achieve the constitutional percentage of affirmative votes. 20-21 Committee on Interchurch Relations (partial report) TE Henry Smith, chairman, led in prayer and presented the Committee's partial report consisting of presentation of fraternal delegates and official visitors. He first introduced TE Ludgero Morais, moderator of the Presbyterian Church of Brazil, who addressed the Assembly briefly. The Assembly was informed of the presence of a Korean Church delegation in the country to comfort and encourage those affected by the Los Angeles riots. He then introduced TE Roshyama Hrangchal of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in India and TE Bon Hag Lee of the Presbyterian Church in Korea. Fraternal delegates were introduced and addressed the Assembly: 1. TE Allen Church, Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church; 2. TE Wherein Keizer, Christian Reformed Church, following whose remarks the Assembly was led in prayer for the deliberations of the CRC Synod today and tomorrow; 3. TE James Bosgraft, Orthodox Presbyterian Church; and 4. A letter from TE Paul Martin, chairman, Interchurch Committee of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, North America, was also read. Pastor Henry Lewis Smith P.O. Box 146 Prattville, Alabama 36067 Dear Henry, Please convey our greetings to the meeting of your General Assembly. To the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America: Greetings in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. In this day of rioting, raping and general disregard for personhood it is essential that the church of the lord jesus be a beacon of the love of god in a broken and decaying world. The enemies of God are organized. Evil is called good. Good is called evil. How much more urgently must the people of God proclaim the glorious redemption of the Lord Jesus in Word but especially in our life. Let the end of your debate and theological discussion be to love God with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength and will all our mind and to love our neighbor as ourselves. May our love be a reflection of the love of the Lord Jesus for His Church. What good are we if we have glorious programs and theology and have not the love in which that theology is embedded? We are nothing. What are the issues of your meeting? I do not know but ultimately they are rooted in the glory of Christ - how is he to be glorified. it is an hour when the church of Jesus Christ must stand firmly on the authority of the Bible and the atoning and propitiatory work of the sacrificial blood of Jesus. Brethren, stand firm in Him maintaining that precious confession for which our father died, in the overflowing love and compassion of the Lord Jesus Christ. Love, Paul M. Martin Reformed Presbyterian Church, North America Finally, TE Robert Norris, observer from the Evangelical Presbyterian Church, brought greetings to the Assembly. 20-22 Committee of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations RE Meade Guy, chairman, led in prayer and presented the Committee's report. Recommendations were acted upon as follows:

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
