# GA21 O29 — Spread Memorial Calling PCA to Fidelity to Its Founding Declarations

**Assembly:** 21st (1993)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 29 From Westminster Presbytery  ·  **Disposition:** Adopted (final)

*Source: [ga21_1993 p. 150](../markdown/ga21_1993.md#ga21-p150)*

---

"Memorial from Concerned Presbyterians" Westminster Presbytery, meeting on April 17, 1993, adopted the following memorial and requests that it be spread upon the Minutes of the Twenty-First General Assembly. Attested by: /s/ Larry E. Ball Stated Clerk "A Memorial Addressed to the 21st General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America: a declaration of concern and a call to the Presbyterian Church in America to be true to her Declarations" TO: The Membership and especially the Ruling and Teaching Elders of the Presbyterian Church in America FROM: The Undersigned Concerned Presbyterian Ruling and Teaching Elders of the Presbyterian Church in America On December 4, 1973, the Presbyterian Church in America held its first General Assembly, and did at that time declare the intention of the newly forming denomination as to the kind of Church that was being brought into existence. The commissioners of the First General Assembly adopted a "Message to All Churches of Jesus Christ Throughout the World," which was signed by the members of that Assembly. In the course of the two decades that have elapsed since that founding date, the Church has not only failed to reach the goals set forth in the "Message to All Churches," but she has in a number of ways actually turned away from these goals. We the undersigned concerned Presbyterians believe that we must hereby bear our testimony to our beloved Church against her abandonment of these positions, and to issue a call to her to demonstrate her integrity as a Church against her abandonment of these positions, and to issued a call to her to demonstrate her integrity as a church by consciously setting out to reverse the present-day trends in the Church and to strive to put into practice what we first affirmed. A copy of the "Message to All Churches" is appended to this statement, together with a list of the signers. While it is true that a number of signers have passed on to glory, and a few have moved to other fellowships, a large number are still living, and many are in places of leadership in the Presbyterian Church in America. In addition, there are a great many new Ruling and Teaching Elders, who were not present at the First General Assembly, but who have assumed the ordination vows of this Church. It is the conviction of the undersigned that the "Message" is but a logical expression of the implications of our ordination vows, and that all of us therefore should be striving to realize the goals set forth in the "Message". Again, for those who were received from the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod, in the "joining and receiving" of 1982, they were received on the terms of the PCA. This means that those so received were entering the PCA on the PCA’s principles, and thus they too are obligated to embrace the goals set forth in our "Message". AREAS OF CONCERN A. The Inerrancy and Sufficiency of Scripture We express our alarm that there are Presbyterians that accept men as ministers who hold to the possibility of "new revelation" from God through prophecy or other means. To do so is to abandon the first principle of the Protestant Reformation, sola scriptura. It attacks the position of our Confessional Standards, which teach the sufficiency of Scripture as the only infallible rule of faith and practice. Let the Assembly declare in no uncertain terms that she means her commitment to the Bible as the only and all-sufficient rale of faith and practice, and to call upon our Courts not to admit to office at any level any who hold to any form of "new" revelation. B. The Delegation of Responsibilities Given to the Church Courts to Other Bodies we denounce the amendment to our Book of Church Order, which delegates all judicial cases to a Standing Judicial Commission, without any right reserved to the Assembly to question or debate the decisions of this Commission. In effect this erects an unbiblical body to handle matters that were delegated by the Lord to the Courts of the Church. we call upon the assembly to begin the process of revising the Book of Church Order so as to provide again for the erection of Assembly Commissions to handle these matters, with the provision of proper consideration of the report of such Commissions by the Assembly itself. C. Looseness in Practice Regarding Subscription We affirm that the PCA was established as a "strict subscription," Old School Presbyterian Church, and we are concerned that there is such a loose practice on the part of our Presbyteries and Sessions on this matter. We call upon the Assembly to remind our Courts of our historic position on this matter, and to require that they put into practice the PCA position on subscription. We further call upon the Assembly to communicate with all Seminaries that are related to the PCA, either at the Assembly, Presbytery or Sessional level to instruct PCA candidates for the ministry in what the PCA expects of them in their ordination examinations. D. The Drift from the Original Concept of Committees Serving the Assembly to Board-type Agencies We are greatly concerned that increasingly our Assembly Committees are acting as Boards, independent of the Assembly. We call upon the Assembly to remind the committees of the guidelines found in the Book of Church Order (14-1). We also call upon the Assembly to instruct the Committees of Commissioners to be more careful in supervising the work of the Permanent Committees, and to instruct the Permanent Committees to take a firmer role in the direction of the various staffs hired by the Committees, and not just "rubber stamp" the recommendations of the staffs. Regarding the course taken by both of the Mission Committees, we express concern over the centralization of power in the staffs of these committees, and the failure to develop a more Presbyterian approach to both home and foreign missions. We call upon the Assembly to direct both Committees to devise a consistently Presbyterian method of handling both home and foreign missions. For home missions, this means the recognition that the mission agency should be the Presbyteries, and not the Assembly. The Assembly's Committee is just to provide financial and technical aid, but not to maintain a control over the home missionaries. This is to prerogative of the Presbyteries. For world missions, it means the development of a Presbyterian structure for the various groups of missionaries around the world, and granting the initiative as to program and functions to the various "missions" around the world. It means nonhierarchical relations between these missions and the Assembly's staff. E. The Efforts to Deny the Ecclesiastical Authority of Higher Courts over Lower Courts We are concerned by the efforts to change the Church polity, by denying the ecclesiastical authority that the higher courts have over the lower courts. We are, and intend to be, Presbyterians in our polity. We cannot be governed by the misuse of ecclesiastical powers by some denominations, or the improper judgments of civil courts regarding what ecclesiastical connection means. Rather the Bible and the Bible alone is to be the authority for our structure. Again, we call upon the Assembly to abandon the attempt to use "worldly models" for the operation of our Assembly Committees and their staffs. We must develop a Biblical structure in the staffs of our Assembly Committees. The Bible teaches the equal authority (i.e. parity) of all elders, and that this authority resides in the assembled elders. This is Biblical Presbyterianism. F. The Move Toward Congregationalism within Congregations We are disturbed by the movement toward Congregationalism within congregations. Biblical Presbyterianism sees the rule of the congregation in the hands of the Session. The only voice that the congregation has in the government of the congregation is the election of the officers. There is abroad in the PCA a movement that would have the Sessions delegate their responsibilities and authority in the various areas of the life of the congregation to committees made up of people from throughout the congregation. This is the erection of a new and unbiblical structure to do the work that the Bible envisions as being handled by the Session. The Session is not a board which reviews the direction set by the congregation: it is the gathered undershepherds who together lead the flock. We call upon the Assembly to warn our congregations not to erect unbiblical structures that are not provided for in the Bible or in our Book of Church Order. G. The Flagrant Abandonment of the Regulative Principle of Worship Particularly distressing to us is the widespread ignoring and open disregard for the regulative principle of worship, which is forbidden in Scripture as "will worship" (Col. 2:23). This is seen in all sorts of innovations in worship, things not commanded by God in the Bible. Immediately after giving the Ten Commandments, God elaborated on the Second Commandment instructing His people to observe His commandments in worship, neither adding to nor subtracting from them. (Deut. 12:32). Ignoring this principle begins with things which appear to be innocent, yet are not supported by the bible as apart of worship. This quickly degenerates to all sorts of entertainment, including skits, dancing, and other modem expressions of offering "strange fire” in services that are called "worship services." It is significant that we are now engaged in behavior which we denounced in a former ecclesiastical association. We call upon the Assembly to stop such practices at every level in our denomination, and to remind the Church that the regulative principle of Scripture is expressed in three places in the Constitution of our Church (Westminster Confession XXI: 1, Larger Catechism Q 107- 110, Shorter Catechism Q 50-51) to which all officers have subscribed in their ordination vows. CONCLUSION It is with regret that we feel constrained to address our beloved Church in this way. Our prayer is that there will be an openness to us by our General Assembly, and that the Assembly will take steps in moving the PCA toward what we declared we would do when we first organized. We believe that the positions we espouse are true to the Word, and to our Confessional and Polity Standards. We call upon our brethren to give this call a hearing, and move toward tme reconciliation of the parties in the Church by acting in integrity toward the declaration made by the founders of this Church. We call on each Elder to review his vows made before God. We especially call upon each signer of the original "Message to All Churches" to pray and work and vote to carry out that which he affirmed before God and man. May God help us all to come to a unity of mind, so that we may be able to walk together in peace and joy. COMMUNICATION 3 "A Memorial Addressed to the 21st General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America" was the same as Overture 29 from Westminster Presbytery (see above) but included the signatures and the attached "Message to All Churches of Jesus Christ Throughout the World From the General Assembly of the National Presbyterian Church" adopted at the First General Assembly of the PCA in 1973: FROM: The Undersigned Concerned Presbyterian Ruling and Teaching Elders of the Presbyterian Church in America Rodney T. King King A. Counts Jim R. Baird Raymond Calgrave, Jr. Eugene C. Case Stanley D. Wells, MD Larry W. Wilson James M. Hope Robert S. Hart Erwin Morrison Mack N. Macquire Joseph D. Beale G. Brent Bradley Jim Elliott John W. Stodghill James Morgan George R. Caler Wiliam Harrell Mack Carlton Ross Lindley James A. Jones, Jr. Terry Jones » W. A. Conrad James M. Bowen, Jr. Charles W. Eason James R. Bruder Robert L. Oldaker Arnold L. Frank Chris Dollar Robert C. Wilson Anthony R. Dallison Roger Wilson Jeffrey M. Black Charles I. Wilson Earl F. Saunders, Jr. Morton H. Smith Jerry W. Crick William G. Morgan Leonard T. Van Horn • James D. Reedy Lawrence B. …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
