# GA30 O32 — Amend BCO 21-4 to Define Good Faith Subscription and Allowable Exceptions

**Assembly:** 30th (2002)  ·  **Source:** Philadelphia Presbytery: “Specify Good Faith Subscription  ·  **Disposition:** Answered by reference

*Source: [ga30_2002 p. 105](../markdown/ga30_2002.md#ga30-p105)*

---

—Version 7” It is the opinion of the CCB that this overture is not in conflict with other parts of the Constitution. [For text and action, see 30-50, III, 2, p. 219.] Adopted by CCB (TE Chapell recused himself) IV. Advice to the Stated Clerk The CCB advised the Stated Clerk on questions posed by him. [See Appendix A, p. 346.] V. Review of Minutes of the Standing Judicial Commission 1. SJC Minutes Nov. 29, 2001, p. 21 ff. Response: In accordance with SJC Manual 20.5, the CCB approves the minutes of the Nov. 29, 2001 meeting of the Standing Judicial Commission (SJC) as being in conformity to the Manual of the SJC and mo 15. Editorial notations regarding form (e.g., punctuation and format) were passed to the Stated Clerk. 2. SJC Minutes March 7, 2002, p. 31 ff. Response: We postpone action on the March 7, 2002 minutes of the SJC and respectfully request the SJC to request more time of the General Assembly and/or reconsider its action “to draft and present to the 30th General Assembly procedures to be placed in the SJC Manual for examining concurring and dissenting opinions to be sure that such opinions are in temperate language ...“ prior to the final report that the CCB makes to the GA. 3. Procedure for Hearing a Memorial Response: It is the advice of CCB that the “Procedure for Hearing a Memorial'’ raises significant constitutional issues. These issues include: 1) our concern that the procedures may reflect a definition of a memorial inconsistent with our historical Presbyterian usage since no clear definition is offered and the term has been variously used in other/former denominations ina manner that allows a higher court to act for a lower court. 2) The lack of clear BCO or SJC Manual definition of what constitutes a “memorial” being “administratively in order.” 3) Significant questions of due process such as the preclusion of appropriate briefing and argument. As an editorial note, we also remind the Stated Clerk that if the changes proposed by the SJC relating to new SJC Manual section 18 are approved, then the present references to SJC Manual 18 in SJC Manual 13-9 (and potentially other places) will need to be RE numbered. Other conforming changes may also be needed. Respectfully Submitted; Respectfully Submitted; /s/ TE Craig Childs, Chairman /s/ RE Richard Springer, Secretary SUPPLEMENTAL REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL BUSINESS A. It was MSP to amend the CCB’s report concerning its response to the SJC’s proposed manual amendment entitled, “Procedure for Hearing a Memorial,’ such that the CCB response in Paragraph 3 of section v of its report was beyond the scope of RAO 15.1 and therefore, the report of the CCB is hereby amended by striking therefrom Paragraph 3 of Section V in its entirety. B. Considered a constitutional inquiry from Philadelphia Presbytery: “At its May 11, 2002, stated meeting, Philadelphia Presbytery voted to make a constitutional inquiry to the Constitutional Business Committee of the General Assembly, to wit: having accepted an appeal from a church member against a judgment rendered against him by the session of his church, and having referred that appeal to a duly appointed commission properly erected by Presbytery, does the Presbytery have the right: 1. to take back from said commission the matter committed to it before the commission can complete its task and render a judgment; and 2. to reverse, without hearing the appeal, the decision of the Session, which found the appellant guilty and suspended him from the office of ruling elder? The actual case in dispute has been in the commission's hands for sixteen months and the record of the case has still not be enable to be finalized to the satisfaction of the appellant, the session, and the commission. Philadelphia Presbytery’ needs and requests the advice of our fathers and brothers. ” It is the opinion of the CCB that in reference to question #1 of the inquiry, our answer is yes, the Presbytery may take back from said commission the matter committed to it before the commission has completed its task and rendered a judgment. In reference to question #2, our answer is no, the Presbytery may not reverse, without hearing the appeal, the decision of the Session. The Presbytery must follow the procedures detailed in BCO 42. Respectfully Submitted, /s/ TE Craig D. Childs, Sr., Chairman /si TE Mark A. Rowden, Acting Secretary SECOND SUPPLEMENTAL REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL BUSINESS 1. Took up from the table the final approval of SJC minutes of March 7, 2002. Given the excerpts from the minutes of a subsequent meeting which showed corrective action, MSP to approve of March 7 without exception. 2. Received a constitutional inquiry asking CCB to give advice on the constitutionality of the Committee of Commissioners recommendation #15. The question posed for CCB was as follows, Is it constitutional for the General Assembly to adopt the following recommendation: That the General Assembly mandate coverage in the PCA health plans for all active ministers and church lay employees who are current residents of the United States and who are not covered under a spouse’s group health plan, and that the Presbyteries be responsible for implementing this mandate. The CCB answered: No. It is the opinion of the CCB that in the absence of any evidence from BCO 14, the Westminster Confession of Faith and Catechisms, or Scripture as to the right of the General Assembly to make such a requirement; the General Assembly may not mandate coverage in the PCA health plan. In addition, BCO 14-1.4 states: “It is the responsibility of every member and member congregation to support the whole work of the denomination as they be led in their conscience held captive to the Word of God.” (Emphasis added.) 3. Received a constitutional inquiry from Southeast Alabama Presbytery, to wit: The duties of Elders, as set forth in the Book of Church Order includes: To watch diligently over the flock committed to their charge, that no corruption of doctrine or of morals enter therein. (BCO 8-3) Which includes overseeing communicant members who have vowed: “...to support the church in its worship and work to the best of (your) ability.” In the fulfillment of their responsibilities, do elders have the right to access to such attendance and financial giving records of the local congregation as they deem necessary? Does the BCO restrict, in any way, the access of elders and/or deacons of a local church to such records? The CCB answered: The inquiry asks about the rights of elders in the context of their duty to take spiritual oversight over their flock. It is the opinion of the CCB that BCO 8-3 and 12-5.a,b give a session the right to access attendance and financial records as they deem necessary in the fulfillment of their responsibilities. In carrying out these responsibilities there are no restrictions on the session, as a court, beyond those that would be imposed by prudence and the Biblical responsibility to protect our neighbors’ good name (cf. WLCQ 145). In the furtherance of the duties specified in BCO 9-2, the Deacons may access financial giving and attendance records. They are restricted by their responsibility to act under the “supervision and authority of the Session” (BCO 9-2, para. 2), the parameters of their BCO 9-2 responsibilities, and the limitations noted in the last sentence of the preceding paragraph. Respectfully Submitted, /s/ TE Craig D. Childs, Sr., Chairman /s/ TE Mark A. Rowden, Acting Secretary Moderator Ryan yielded the chair to TE Wilson Benton. 30-30 Report of the Standing Judicial Commission RE John White, Chairman, led the Assembly in prayer and presented the report. He reported on the communications received and considered concerning the proposed amendment of the SJC Manual Section 13.8. Recommendations a and b were adopted as amended. [See text below, p. 172.] Recommendation V was adopted. RE White led the Assembly in prayer. REPORT OF THE STANDING JUDICIAL COMMISSION TO THE THIRTIETH GENERAL ASSEMBLYOF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN AMERICA

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
