# GA31 O8 — Erect Ad Interim Committee to Study Confessional Subscription

**Assembly:** 31st (2003)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 8 from Mississippi Valley Presbytery (to B&O, AC)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered in the negative

*Source: [ga31_2003 p. 188](../markdown/ga31_2003.md#ga31-p188)*

---

“Erect Ad Interim Committee on Subscription” Fathers and Brethren: Our presbytery has voted not to affirm the proposed amendment to _BCO_ 21-4 passed at the 30 [th] General Assembly, and we did so with several concerns. We think it wise for the welfare of the whole church that these concerns be addressed in a constructive way. Our declining to pass this overture does not reflect a lack of good faith commitment to work for the peace, purity, progress and unity of the PCA. We fully grant the good intentions of those who labored to create this overture and are appreciative of many helpful aspects to this proposal, but we are concerned about some of the specifics of its content and are also concerned that a climate has been created in which it is considered dangerous to raise questions about the wisdom and substance of this proposed amendment. Hence, given the likelihood of the passage of this proposed amendment by the requisite number of presbyteries, we wish, as a presbytery, to stand as one (both those of us who are supportive of the amendment and those of us with reservations about it) and convey to the Assembly as a whole the following specific concerns. These concerns relate both to the process and content of the proposed amendment to the _BCO_ . 1. It would have been desirable for this kind of an overture to come to the church’s attention in the way counseled by the 22 [nd] General Assembly, rather than to have been perfected outside the courts of the church and then presented to the courts of the church as essentially unamendable. Such a process could not have been more different than that envisaged by the 22 [nd] GA. The wise counsel of the 22 [nd] GA was as follows: [W]ith respect to the question concerning subscription, the Assembly suggests that interested Ruling and Teaching Elders (particularly from ostensibly differing points of view) could serve the church well by producing and circulating among themselves draft language for a new section IV of the Preface of _The_ _Book of Church Order_ (to be titled: “Of the Church’s Confession and Subscription”) where in brief paragraphs would be stated the nature and authority of the Confession and Catechisms, their justification and purposes, and the meaning of subscription to the doctrinal standards in the PCA. Such drafts as perfected through prayerful study and charitable discussion, without the pressures and politics of an impending vote, could then be proposed to the Presbyteries for study, perfection, and circulation among themselves, in hope that some measure of consensus could be achieved in the church before the formal amending process of sending an overture to the General Assembly even begins. Perhaps this course, with the Lord’s blessing, would provide a way for securing both the bonds of our unity, and the purity of our faith, while maintaining peace in the church under the reign of our Lord Jesus Christ.” _M22GA_ (1994), pp. 233-34. Had this wise advice and counsel been followed, the consciences of many good men would not have been offended and we would have had a better opportunity to heal rather than perpetuate and exacerbate some of our divisions. 2. It seems exceedingly unwise to begin one’s public affirmation of the Church’s Confession by saying, first and foremost, that one doesn’t necessarily embrace it! The first phrase of the proposed amendment is “While our Constitution does not require the candidate’s affirmation of every statement and/or proposition of doctrine in our Confession of Faith and Catechisms...” This sets forth what is not meant by confessional subscription (rather than what is) and furthermore denies a position that few or none affirm. It thus functions, on the one hand, to enshrine a straw man (the erroneous stereotype that “strict subscription” means that no exceptions can be taken to the Confession) and, on the other (and worse psychologically), to put one’s relation to the Confession in the negative – so that personal dissent to specific propositions is more prominent than a whole-hearted, good faith, embrace of confessional theology. 3. The proposed amendment fails to define “an exception.” This deficiency is almost fatal to the accomplishment of the noble goals of the drafters of this overture. Indeed, the General Assembly’s Committee on Constitutional Business cited precisely such a fatal flaw in another overture offered at last year’s GA as a ground for rejecting it because its language created “constitutional ambiguity.” The CCB said: “3. An ambiguity created by the proposed language is the introduction of the phrase: ‘exception to the standards.’ This phrase is nowhere else found in our constitution. The phrase elicits a plethora of interpretations, many of which go beyond our present Constitutional parameters.” CCB Advice on Overture 4 ( _M30GA_, 30-29, III, p. 100) 4. The proposed amendment, though it has been promoted as a solution to our problems (or at least a significant step toward that), fails to deal with the two most important issues regarding subscription in the PCA: (1) can exceptions be taught? and (2) what are the nonnegotiables? In other words, to frame the subscription debate in the PCA as if the two “sides” are “those who believe that exceptions can be taken to the Confession” (loose subscriptionists) and “those who do not believe that exceptions can be taken to the Confession” (strict subscriptionists) is grossly unfair and inaccurate. The real issues are as follows. (1) Can one teach one’s exceptions? does a presbytery have aright to say to a man, “yes we will ordain you, we will also love and respect you, we find your theology, in general, to be excellent, but we ask you not teach such-and-such a view that you hold because it is unbiblical, out of accord with the Standards and potentially harmful to the peace and unity of the church – even though you think it is biblical”? (2) How far can we go with granting allowable exceptions? Is there anything non-negotiable in the PCA standards? What if presbytery a allows an exception to a man who, for instance, denies the Nicene doctrine of the Trinity in _WCF_ 2.3 (surely a doctrine at the heart of the faith) and he wishes to transfer to presbytery B, who decides either that he cannot teach views he once taught or, even more traumatically, that he is not acceptable to the presbytery? These are the real questions that bedevil us, and on these issues the “sides” are less clearly drawn, as was patently apparent on the floor of GA last summer. 5. The proposed amendment lacks a provision that exceptions be presented in writing and recorded. Even the Evangelical Presbyterian Church (a fellowship far more loosely connected to the Confession than is our own denomination) requires this! Many of our own presbyteries already require this, but to fail to bring about uniformity on this matter is to invite abuse of this statute in our denomination. **Therefore,** the Presbytery of the Mississippi Valley requests that the Assembly approve and the moderator appoint an Ad Hoc Committee on Subscription, made up of 12 members (8 TEs and 4 REs), reflective of the range and balance of opinion in the denomination on these important matters, and commissioned to draft such _BCO_ amendments as necessary to clarify and relieve the concerns before us. The Committee shall report back to the GA no more than two years hence. The amendments arising from this committee’s work will be presented for information and explained in detail in the committee’s final report to GA. Thereafter, presbyteries will be encouraged to take up these amendments as their own and send them up to the following General Assembly to be deliberated and perfected in the Bills and Overtures Committee and voted upon by the Assembly. We further request that the General Assembly suspend “RAO” 8-3 limiting the number of commissioners serving on an Ad Hoc committee and that the moderator include the following men among those appointed: TE Will Barker, TE Bryan Chapell, TE David Coffin, TE Harry Reeder, TE J. Ligon Duncan III, TE Joseph Wheat, TE Philip G. Ryken, TE Robert C. (Ric) Cannada Jr., RE Frederick (Jay) Neikirk (Ascension), RE Samuel J. (Sam) Duncan (Grace), RE Mark Belz (Missouri), RE Mark Baxter (Central Georgia), with the Stated Clerk of the GA, Roy Taylor, serving as an advisory (non-voting) member of the committee. The budget for the Ad Hoc Committee would be $15,000 per year for up to two years and would be raised through voluntary designated contributions and distributed through the Administrative Committee (“RAO” 4-18).

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
