# GA33 O14 — Report on New Perspectives on Paul

**Assembly:** 33rd (2005)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 14 from Mississippi Valley Presbytery (to B & O)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered in the negative

*Source: [ga33_2005 p. 206](../markdown/ga33_2005.md#ga33-p206)*

---

“Mississippi Valley Informational Report on the New Perspectives on Paul, etc.” **The Presbytery of the Mississippi Valley** Roger G. Collins, Stated Clerk 130 Byram Parkway, Byram MS 39272-9601 (601) 372-5627, (601) 317-3041 May 11, 2005 The Reverend Dr. L. Roy Taylor, Stated Clerk General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America 1700 North Brown Road, Suite 105 Lawrenceville, GA 30043-8143 Dear Dr. Taylor, The Presbytery of the Mississippi Valley (MVP) is in receipt of your communication relating to the report of the MVP Study Committee on the NPP et al, and the advice of the Committee on Constitutional Business (CCB). We understand that some have complained that the communication from MVP does not meet the guidelines of “RAO” 10-1 and 10-2, and the CCB has so also advised. Though we believe that our report does meet the standards (and is in accord with past PCA practice) for a proper communication, out of deference to the CCB, and not wanting to unnecessarily burden the GA with a needless debate relating to procedural technicalities, we hereby withdraw that communication to GA. Please remove it from the docket. At the same time, we are submitting to you a slightly revised version of the report as an overture. This should put all procedural technicalities out of question. **Our request to GA in this overture is that General Assembly** **send this report to the clerks of the PCA presbyteries, and make it** **available via various media, as a useful study aid in the ongoing** **discussion relating to the “New Perspectives on Paul,” the theology of** **N.T. Wright, the theology of Norman Shepherd, and the theology of the** **so-called “Federal Vision” in the PCA.** In passing, we would like to note that though some voices on the internet and elsewhere have accused the MVP report of being an attempt to “circularize” the courts of the church on a matter which has not yet come before the GA as a judicial case, we deny such charges as unfounded. The proponents of these new views have themselves been propagating their distinctive views ubiquitously for half a decade or more via various media, and are now seeking to silence any negative evaluation of their own opinions. We, on the other hand, have, as a court of the church, simply sought to help other courts of the church as they wrestle with these issues. If our work aids the purity and peace of the larger PCA, our efforts will have been amply rewarded. May the Lord continue his blessings on your labors. Yours faithfully, /s/ Roger G. Collins Stated Clerk The Presbytery of the Mississippi Valley (PCA) The Reverend Roger Collins, Stated Clerk http://www.msvalleypresbytery.com 130 Byram Parkway MSVP04@msn.com Byram, Mississippi 39272-9601 Fathers and Brethren, A year ago the Presbytery of the Mississippi Valley (hereafter MVP) appointed an ad hoc committee charged with facilitating the presbytery's study of the issues surrounding the distinct but related phenomena of the socalled "New Perspectives on Paul" (NPP) (including the theology of N.T. Wright, hereafter NTW); the so-called "Auburn Avenue Theology" (hereafter AAT, which is sometimes referred to as the "Federal Vision," hereafter FV, or AAT/FV) and the theology of Norman Shepherd (hereafter NS). The committee began its work well aware of the uniquenesses of and differences between these various theological projects, but also realizing that they all share a certain similar attraction to a distinct theological sub-culture within various Reformed denominations (PCA, OPC, CRC, URCNA, etc). Our study committee's appreciation of the distinctness of these theological blueprints is reflected in the provision of four separate summary outlines (and one critical overview) of these multifarious views. The need for such a study has become increasingly obvious. In the PCA, at least two presbyteries have refused to transfer PCA ministers sympathetic to the AAT/FV into their presbyteries. Recently, Evangel Presbytery's Credentials Committee rejected for transfer into their bounds a PCA minister in good standing, who embraces the AAT/FV, finding his views to be outside the pale of acceptable doctrinal diversity. The minister and the calling church have now left the PCA for the CRE (the fellowship of churches associated with Doug Wilson of Moscow, Idaho). Several PCA presbyteries have established their own study committees on the NPP, the theology of NS, and the AAT/FV (among them, Western Carolina, Blue Ridge and Missouri). One Reformed denomination (the RPC[GA]) and one PCA presbytery (Central Carolina) have now sent communications asking for Louisiana Presbytery to conduct a theological investigation of the AAT/FV within its own bounds. The OPC has also established a study committee. Meanwhile, numerous books and articles are appearing on these subjects, and conferences, seminars and lectures (pro and con) are proliferating (the PCA's Stated Clerk has recently sponsored a lecture for all the Clerks of the PCA presbyteries, and our denominational seminary, Covenant, has also held a series of talks). One PCA session and congregation has promoted through its pastors' conference the teachings of NS and NTW as helpful to an ongoing intramural Reformed dialogue and discussion on covenant and justification. Members transferring from AAT/FV-friendly churches have attempted to force the sessions of the churches to which they have relocated to allow for their practice of AAT/FV distinctives relating to child communion and membership (and in one case have pursued a judicial appeal all the way through presbytery to the SJC). There have been some reported cases of PCA TEs being pressured from their calls through theological opposition by AAT/FV sympathetic sessions or TEs. Additionally, leading pastor-theologians in the Reformed and evangelical world have raised concerns over the unbiblical and anti-confessional views of the NPP, NTW, NS and the AAT/FV theologies. Sinclair Ferguson, Al Mohler, Doug Kelly, Don Carson, Rick Phillips, John Piper, R.C. Sproul, Cal Beisner, Frank Barker and more have publicly indicated their disapproval of the theological program of some or all of these various figures and groups. Yet, a not insignificant number of PCA teaching elders shows significant sympathy with these theological tendencies about which our most trusted churchmen and scholars have expressed distress. Hence, the presbytery's committee sponsored more than thirty hours of lecture and discussion on the assigned subjects, and held a face to face meeting with representatives of the Auburn Avenue Presbyterian Church of Monroe, Louisiana. The committee has also provided the presbytery with three sets of audio recordings pertaining to the theology of the NPP, the theology of NS, and the theology of the FV (AAT). One book has already been published as a result of the committee's labors, Guy Waters' _**Justification and the New Perspectives**_ (P&R, 2004) and another is on the way, Guy Waters' _**Covenant Theology Improved?**_ (P&R, 2005) (this volume deals with the AAT/FV). Dr. Waters' work has been widely lauded as a definitive Reformed treatment of the NPP and no doubt so also will his work of the AAT/FV. The presbytery's committee presented a preliminary informational report to MVP in November of 2004. This report contained the following: a synoptic presentation of the views of the NPP (and especially the teaching of NTW), of NS, and of the AAT/FV. At that time, the committee indicated to presbytery that it would move adoption of a final report in February, 2005. The summary statements in this report are improved and corrected versions of that preliminary information. Since the time of the preliminary informational report, the Session of the Auburn Avenue Presbyterian Church (hereafter AAPC) has issued a response charging our committee with misrepresenting their positions (this has been distributed via email to the presbyteries of the PCA – it is included in this report a san exhibit). Having met face to face with three representatives of the AAPC, the MVP committee unanimously agreed that the committee's representations of the AAPC session's original Summary Statement and of the AAT/FV in its _Précis on the Federal Vision (AAT/FV)_ and in its _Critical_ _Overview of the AAPC Summary Statement_ are both accurate and helpful, and MVP as a presbytery concurs. The AAPC Session's response asserted three things globally – that the MVP preliminary informational report: (1) "frequently assumes a monolithic and univocal 'Reformed Tradition'" and "overlooks the various shades of diversity within historic Reformed theology (including the Westminsterian tradition);" (2) "assumes that there is a well-defined movement labeled the 'Federal Vision' and fails to take into account the "differences that exist between the positions held by the individuals involved;" and (3) shows "no appreciation of the nuances or qualifications or specified terminology that has been utilized by the 'Federal Vision' men" and does not engage "with the wide array of exegetical, theological, and historical arguments set forth by the men associated with the 'Federal Vision.'" In discussion with the representatives of AAPC, our committee denied the validity of each of these concerns. First, it was pointed out that the committee was well aware of the diversity of the Reformed tradition (one of the MVP committee members has published scholarly work on that very subject). The issue at stake, however, is not whether there is diversity in the Reformed tradition, but whether the AAT is within the bounds of acceptable diversity. Furthermore, it should be noted that we do not subscribe to the "Reformed tradition," generically, as PCA elders, rather, we subscribe specifically to the _Confession of Faith_ . Second, the committee indicated that it is well aware of the amorphous character of what is being called the AAT/FV. Nevertheless, there are discernable common emphases and there is a generally shared desire among FV proponents to stress what they call the objectivity of the covenant, a shared desire to improve upon the classical formulations of Reformed covenant theology, and a consequent willingness to reformulate historic Reformed teaching on election, covenant, justification, perseverance, ecclesiology, and more. Whether one calls this a movement or not is immaterial. It is clear from the above that something identifiable exists, and one of the key goals of the committee was to make it more discernable. Third, the committee, having studied thousands of pages of material from FV proponents, is keenly aware of the nuances, qualifications, and terminological distinctions deployed by advocates of the FV. Nevertheless, the committee sought to highlight the main commonalities and tendencies in this theological approach, as well as some of the more striking aberrations being propounded by key exponents of the FV. As to the charge of not engaging with the FV's exegetical, theological and historical arguments, the committee's purview did not entail the provision of a definitive exegetical, historical and theological rebuttal, but rather it set out to provide (1) an accurate and useful description of the FV position, and (2) a juxtaposition of specific FV views with the confessional position. That having been said, even the limited review, description and critique provided by the committee is sufficient to indicate the FV's divergence from confessional theology and biblical teaching. The MVP committee had initially thought of not footnoting the FV summary statement, in order to avoid having to name names and involving personalities (hoping that a more detached and anonymous account of the FV theology would help keep the temperature of subsequent discussion down). However, when the charges of misrepresentation were spread abroad, the committee determined to provide full public documentation of its descriptions in order to vindicate the accuracy of the …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
