# GA37 O3 — Amend BCO 34-1 and 33-1 Regarding Assumption of Original Jurisdiction

**Assembly:** 37th (2009)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 3 from Central Carolina Presbytery (to CCB, OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered in the negative  ·  **BCO:** 33-1, 34-1

*Source: [ga37_2009 p. 265](../markdown/ga37_2009.md#ga37-p265)*

---

“Amend _BCO_ 34-1 and 33-1 Regarding Assumption of Original Jurisdiction” [Strike-through for deletions; bold for additions] Chapter 34 **-** _Special Rules Pertaining to Process Against a Minister_ _(Teaching Elder)_ 34-1. Process against a minister shall be entered before the presbytery of which he is a member. However, ~~if the Presbytery~~ ~~refuses to act~~ in doctrinal cases or cases of public scandal ~~and two~~ ~~**,**~~ **if five** other Presbyteries request the General Assembly to assume original jurisdiction (to first receive and initially hear and determine), the General Assembly shall do so. **Assumption shall** **be postponed until the Presbytery has concluded its** **consideration of the matter and rendered its judgment – or at** **least until after it has been afforded reasonable time to do so.** Chapter 33 **-** _Special Rules Pertaining to Process Before Sessions_ 33-1. Process against all church members, other than ministers of the Gospel, shall be entered before the Session of the church to which such members belong, except in cases of appeal. However, ~~if the Session refuses to act~~ in doctrinal cases or instances of public scandal ~~and~~ **, if** two other Sessions of churches in the same Presbytery request the Presbytery of which the church is a member to initiate proper or appropriate action in a case of process and thus assume jurisdiction and authority, the Presbytery shall do so. **Assumption shall be postponed until the Session has concluded** **its consideration of the matter and rendered its judgment – or** **at least until after it has been afforded reasonable time to do** **so.** **RATIONALE** Presently, there are three conditions that “set the bar” for a higher court to assume original jurisdiction (AOJ) over a minister or church member: 1) the matter must be considered a doctrinal case or case of public scandal, 2) the Presbytery (or Session) refuses to act, 3) two other Presbyteries (or Sessions) request the higher court to AOJ. This overture seeks to remove the second condition, deleting the potentiallyconfusing phrase _“if the Presbytery/Session refuses to act.”_ It also raises the bar in the required number of petitioning Presbyteries. (Currently, with 76 Presbyteries, five equates to 6½ %.) The overture leaves the bar at two for petitioning Sessions (since the average Presbytery has 16 churches). Three values need to be balanced: - **a)** the right of individuals to be judged by the court most familiar with them, - **b)** the right of the original court (the narrower church) to decide matters in its jurisdiction, and - **c)** the right of the broader church (via the higher court) to re-examine matters in limited circumstances - doctrinal cases or cases of potential public scandal. The present wording of 34-1 and 33-1 upsets the proper balance. The overture restores it. Appropriate Deference to the Original Court whenever a presbytery or session is actively addressing a matter, the higher court must postpone considering petitions for AOJ until the original court has concluded its consideration and rendered its judgment, or at least has been afforded reasonable time to do so (in the judgment of the higher court). Clearly, it would be unmanageable for two courts to exercise original jurisdiction simultaneously, and unfair to the party in question. However, if the original court does not address or conclude the matter within a reasonable time, the higher court could then proceed with AOJ. While restoring proper balance, reasonable barriers must remain in place to defend the rights of the original court and its members. A philosophy of deference is reflected in _BCO_ 39 regarding higher court judicial review, and while judicial (appellate) review is different than AOJ, the general principles still adhere. 39-3.2. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great deference to a lower court regarding those factual matters which the lower court is more competent to determine, because of its proximity to the events in question, and because of its personal knowledge and observations of the parties and witnesses involved. . . . 39-3.3. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great deference to a lower court regarding those matters of discretion and judgment which can only be addressed by a court with familiar acquaintance of the events and parties. . . . At the same time, _BCO_ 39 uses a different standard of deference for doctrinal cases (which are the more likely matters for AOJ): 39-3.4. . . .a higher court should not consider itself obliged to exhibit the same deference to a lower court when the issues being reviewed involve the interpretation of the Constitution of the Church. . . . [i.e., “its doctrinal standards set forth in the _Westminster_ _Confession,_ together with the _Larger_ and _Shorter Catechisms,_ and _The Book of Church Order_ . . .” from _BCO_ Preface III] Refuses to “Act” As presently worded, AOJ via 34-1 or 33-1 is essentially unachievable since the phrase “refuses to act” is vague – or at least it has been interpreted variously. Does it mean a Presbytery refuses to: (a) discuss the matter, (b) investigate informally, (c) investigate formally, (d) indict, (e) try and convict, (f) censure appropriately, or (g) something else? Some men plausibly interpret _“to act”_ as _“to indict”_ since the paragraph begins with the noun “Process” and process begins with indictment and appointment of a prosecutor. But that is not how the PCA’s highest court has interpreted the phrase in two cases. The noun “act” can, and has been, interpreted by some elders to mean just about any action or attention a Presbytery gives to the matter. And even if Presbytery’s “action” is broadly considered unacceptable, AOJ might not be possible via 34-1 since (some might argue) the Presbytery did not technically “refuse to act.” If so, the bar for AOJ is set out-of-reach. The bar needs to be brought down to a reasonable level. To remedy this flaw, the GA should simply delete any reference to what the lower court does. AOJ should not be contingent on the actions of the original court. The bar can be set at a reasonable level by the other two conditions. Petitioning Threshold With 76 Presbyteries, two is an insufficient number to initiate consideration of AOJ. Five is a more reasonable threshold. In 2002, an overture proposed raising the bar to 10% of all Presbyteries, but today that would require eight and that threshold seems needlessly high. (Furthermore, 24 Presbyteries voted against the overture raising the bar to 10%.) By comparison, AOJ can occur in four other Presbyterian denominations without _any_ petitions from lower courts (see below). Regarding 33-1, since 2/3 of all Presbyteries have less than 20 churches, the threshold of two petitioning Sessions remains sufficient and 33-1 should remain unchanged in that regard. From the 2007 PCA _Yearbook_, the median number of churches in our Presbyteries is 16, and for that median, two equates to 12 ½%. The largest Presbytery has 48 churches and the smallest has 5. The two-Session threshold equates to 5% for a Presbytery with 40 churches, but 20% for a Presbytery with 10. Here is the current breakdown (also attached): 4 Presbyteries with 40 or more churches 7 Presbyteries with 30-39 churches 14 Presbyteries with 20-29 churches 34 Presbyteries with 10-19 churches 17 Presbyteries with 10 or less churches Judicial History Two years ago, a doctrinal matter involving a minister in louisiana presbytery was well-suited for AOJ, but it did not happen – despite valid petitions from Presbyteries. The overly-broad interpretation of the phrase “refuses to act” blocked AOJ. In that case, the PCA got tangled addressing it via less direct and less suitable routes (via Memorial, _BCO_ 40-5, and eventually _BCO_ 43). Rather than assuming original jurisdiction and requiring the minister to answer for himself, the entire Presbytery was eventually put on trial in a novel and somewhat awkward proceeding (Case 2007-14, M36GA Dallas). AOJ would have been the most logical and appropriate path to address the matter, and would have better served the PCA, the SJC, Louisiana Presbytery and the minister in question. Nine years ago, this phrase also had the PCA knotted ina matter involving a minister from Tennessee Valley Presbytery (Case 1999-01, _M28GA_ Tampa 2000 & _M29GA_, Dallas 2001). In that case, the SJC also declined requests from multiple Presbyteries and ruled it could not assume original jurisdiction because TVP had not “refused to act.” (GA eventually overruled the SJC and instructed them to assume original jurisdiction and conduct a 31-2 investigation, which subsequently resulted in no indictment. After that case, the GA amended the SJC Manual and it now has procedures in the assumption of original jurisdiction – Section 18.) Legislative History The PCA Historical Center reports the PCA provision for GA to assume original jurisdiction might be related to earlier events in the PCUS. “Around 1940, PCUS presbyteries of Harmony, Knoxville, Mecklenburg and Central Mississippi each brought overtures to the PCUS General Assembly requesting an investigation of the teachings of E.T. Thompson at Union Seminary in Richmond. These overtures were answered in the negative on the understanding that in the PCUS _BCO,_ original jurisdiction over a minister resided _solely_ in the presbytery. Dr. Thompson was further protected when his East Hanover Presbytery indicated they had investigated his teachings and found them to be in conformity with the Standards. By this action, the PCUS Assembly turned original jurisdiction into exclusive jurisdiction.” In 1973 when the PCA formed with 16 Presbyteries, _BCO_ 34-1 only specified that “other Presbyteries” could request the GA to assume original jurisdiction. Sixteen years later in 1989, based on a recommendation from the Ad Interim Committee on the GA, it was amended to specify “two other Presbyteries.” (PCA then had 45 Presbyteries.) This change also conformed 34-1 with 33-1, which already required two Sessions to petition a Presbytery for AOJ. ( _M17GA_, p. 55) In 2001, Evangel Presbytery brought an overture seeking to amend 33-1 and 34-1, but the GA answered in the negative ( _M29GA_, p. 203). A year later, 341 was revisited when 23 Presbyteries overtured the 2002 Birmingham GA to increase the petitioning threshold from “two other Presbyteries” to “at least 10% of all the Presbyteries.” The 30th GA adopted that overture and sent it to the 64 Presbyteries for vote. While 40 Presbyteries eventually voted in favor of the increase (62.5%), it was three short of the 2/3 required and thus was not adopted ( _M30GA_, p. 214 & _M31GA_, p. 51). Other Presbyterian Denominations The OPC does not have a provision for the assumption of original jurisdiction, but there are provisions in the ARP, EPC, RPCNA, and PCUSA. Excerpts are shown below and underlining is added to show the “measure” of the original court’s actions. None of their provisions require petitions from _any_ lower courts to trigger AOJ. Their higher courts can assume original jurisdiction unilaterally (with cause, and sometimes with a time delay and/or notification to the lower court). ARP Book of Discipline, Chapter 3: Jurisdiction, paragraph 3 – In cases where the court having original jurisdiction is unable or unwilling to exercise jurisdiction, the next higher court may assume original jurisdiction upon demonstration of sufficient cause having been shown to the higher court. EPC Book of Discipline, Chapter 3: Jurisdiction, paragraph 3 – Assumption of Jurisdiction. In the event a court shall be unable or unwilling to try a person or persons accused, the next higher court may assume jurisdiction after giving thirty days’ written notice to the lower court of its intention to assume jurisdiction. RPCNA Book of Discipline, Section 2, Chapter 1: Parties & Jurisdiction, paragraph 5. The presbytery has original jurisdiction in relation to …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
