# GA40 O18 — Amend BCO 34-1 and 33-1 Regarding Assumption of Original Jurisdiction

**Assembly:** 40th (2012)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 18 from Pacific Northwest Presbytery (to CCB, OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Referred  ·  **BCO:** 33-1, 34-1

*Source: [ga40_2012 p. 709](../markdown/ga40_2012.md#ga40-p709)*

---

“Amend _BCO_ 34-1 and 33-1 to Clarify the Prerequisite, and Provide a More Reasonable Threshold, for the Assumption of Original Jurisdiction” [Strike-through for deletions; additions underlined] Chapter 34 - Special Rules Pertaining to Process Against a Minister (Teaching Elder) 34-1. Process against a minister shall be entered before the presbytery of which he is a member. However, if the Presbytery ~~refuses to act~~ declines to order an indictment in doctrinal cases or cases of public scandal and ~~two~~ at least 7% of the other Presbyteries request the General Assembly to assume original jurisdiction (to first receive and initially hear and determine), the General Assembly shall do so. Chapter 33 - Special Rules Pertaining to Process Before Sessions 33-1. Process against all church members, other than ministers of the Gospel, shall be entered before the Session of the church to which such members belong, except in cases of appeal. However, if the Session ~~refuses to act~~ ~~d~~ eclines to order an indictment in doctrinal cases or instances of public scandal and two other Sessions of churches in the same Presbytery request the Presbytery of which the church is a member to ~~initiate proper or appropriate action in a case of~~ ~~process and thus assume jurisdiction and authority~~ assume original jurisdiction (to first receive and initially hear and determine), the Presbytery shall do so. Presently, there are 3 conditions necessary for a higher court to assume original jurisdiction (“AOJ”) over a minister or church member: (a) The higher court must consider the matter to be a doctrinal case or case of public scandal. (b) The higher court must determine that the lower court refuses to act. (c) Two other lower courts must request the higher court to AOJ. This overture seeks to clarify the vague wording of the prerequisite by replacing “refuses to act” with “declines to order an indictment.” The current phrase is highly subjective. The proposed replacement is objective and clearly determinable. Directly tied to that revision, the overture also raises the threshold in the required number of petitioning courts. The proposed threshold of “at least 7%” is, admittedly, somewhat arbitrary. We tried to estimate what % would be most broadly supported in the PCA. We respectfully defer to the wisdom of the GA Overtures Committee and the Louisville GA in determining that %. With 82 Presbyteries, a threshold of “ _at least 7%”_ would require 6 Presbyteries. (As a comparison, a threshold of “ _at least 5%”_ would require 5 and “ _at least 10%”_ would require 9.) Taking jurisdiction away from a court against its will is an extraordinary act. But in certain extraordinary circumstances, it should be possible. But given the _BCO_ ’s current, vague wording (“refuses to act”), AOJ will not likely ever happen. At the same time, we don’t believe less than 7% would be a prudent threshold to automatically trigger such extraordinary action. (By parliamentary standards, 7 out of 100 is a very small minority.) Refuses to “Act” - As presently worded, AOJ is largely unachievable because the phrase “refuses to act” is vague – or at least it has been interpreted variously. Does it mean a Presbytery refuses to: (a) discuss the matter, (b) investigate informally, (c) investigate formally, (d) indict, (e) try and convict, (f) censure appropriately, or (g) something else? The noun “act” can, and has been, interpreted by some elders to mean just about any action or attention a Presbytery gives to the matter. Since “act” is not explicitly defined, a Presbytery might argue it has acted based on any amount of consideration it gives to the matter. And even if their “action” is broadly considered unacceptable, AOJ might not be possible since many might argue Presbytery did not technically “refuse to act.” Petitioning Threshold - With 82 Presbyteries now, two is clearly not adequate or prudent to trigger AOJ. That equates to less than 2½ % - a tiny minority (especially considering the gravity and impact of AOJ.) Nowhere in Robert’s Rules, for example, does it envision such a tiny minority having the power to automatically trigger such an extraordinary action. Seven percent is more reasonable - but even that number is a very small minority by parliamentary standards. For example, for this overture to be adopted, it would take 55 Presbyteries to vote in favor. But after adoption, it would only take 6 to trigger AOJ. It should be noted that in 2002, twenty-three Presbyteries overtured the GA to raise the threshold to 10%, and between the 2002 and 2003 GAs that amendment was approved by 62% of the Presbyteries - 3 shy of adoption. If it had been adopted, it would have required 7 Presbyteries to trigger AOJ – i.e., 10% of the 64 Presbyteries. (See “Legislative History” below.) Regarding AOJ at the Session level ( _BCO_ 33-1), since most Presbyteries have more than 10 but less than 30 churches, the current petitioning requirement of two Sessions remains sufficient. AOJ is extraordinary for several reasons: 1. Familiarity - When a higher court takes jurisdiction away from another court, the accused will be investigated by, and could be tried by, a court much less familiar with him, his life, his ministry, the events in question, personal knowledge of and observations of the parties and witnesses involved, etc. 2. Appeal - In AOJ, the accused loses one level of appeal. Indeed, in the event the SJC assumes original jurisdiction from a Presbytery over a minister, he loses any appeal. In that instance, the trial court verdict will be final. 3. No Prior Finding of Error - When AOJ occurs, it does not require any prior finding by the higher court of any error committed by the lower court. But when the original court declines to order an indictment, it has presumably done so on the basis of factual findings and decisions on matters of discretion and judgment related to the reports, allegations, or charges. And per our Constitution, a higher court must ordinarily exhibit “great deference” to a lower court in such matters and should not reverse such findings and decisions unless there is “clear error” on the part of the lower court ( _BCO_ 393.2 & 3.3). But the _BCO_ does not require the higher court to find any error prior to AOJ. Thus, it is truly an extraordinary step. It is important to note that our _BCO_ 39-3 standards of review have no counterpart in the _BCO_ s of the OPC, ARP, RPCNA, EPC, CRC or PCUSA. Apparently, our standards of review are uniquely important to the PCA. So important that the PCA requires the chairman of every SJC Panel to “read to the Panel Members the four principles adopted as standards of Review in _BCO_ 39-3” before every hearing begins. (SJCM 17.2.c) AOJ is a highly unusual procedure. The OPC, for example, does not have any provision for AOJ. PCA elders and Presbyteries that believe AOJ should be _more frequent_ might support this overture because the revision actually makes it possible (by finally clarifying “refuses to act”). Others who believe AOJ should only occur in _rare and extraordinary_ circumstances might support this overture because AOJ would take at least 7% of the other courts to file petitions. Judicial History - Thirteen years ago, the vague phrase “refuses to act” had the PCA tangled ina matter involving a minister from tennessee valley Presbytery (Case 1999-01, _M28GA_ Tampa 2000 & _M29GA_, Dallas 2001). In that case, the SJC declined requests from multiple Presbyteries and ruled it could not assume original jurisdiction because TVP had not “refused to act.” Eventually, the Tampa GA overruled the SJC’s initial decision and instructed it to assume original jurisdiction and conduct a 31-2 investigation (which subsequently resulted in no indictment). After that case, the GA amended the SJC Manual and it now has procedures for handling AOJ (i.e., SJCM 16). Five years ago, a doctrinal matter involving a minister in louisiana Presbytery was probably also quite suited for AOJ, but it didn’t happen despite valid petitions from multiple Presbyteries. The overly broad interpretation of the phrase “refuses to act” blocked AOJ. In that case, the PCA got tangled addressing it via less direct and less suitable routes (via Memorial, _BCO_ 40-5, and eventually _BCO_ 43). Rather than assuming original jurisdiction and having the minister answer for himself, the Presbytery itself was eventually put on trial in a novel and somewhat awkward proceeding (Case 2007-14, _M36GA_ Dallas). AOJ would have been a more logical and appropriate path to address the matter, and would have better served the PCA, the SJC, Louisiana Presbytery, and the minister in question. Other judicial cases have arisen in recent years, especially at the Presbytery level, for which this revision would also have been helpful. Legislative History - The PCA Historical Center reports the PCA provision for AOJ might be related to events in the PCUS 70 years ago. “Around 1940, PCUS presbyteries of Harmony, Knoxville, Mecklenburg and Central Mississippi each brought overtures to the PCUS General Assembly requesting an investigation of the teachings of E.T. Thompson at Union Seminary in Richmond. These overtures were answered in the negative on the understanding that in the PCUS _BCO_, original jurisdiction over a minister resided solely in the presbytery. Dr. Thompson was further protected when his East Hanover Presbytery indicated they had investigated his teachings and found them to be in conformity with the Standards. By this action, the PCUS Assembly turned original jurisdiction into exclusive jurisdiction.” In 1973 when the PCA formed with 16 Presbyteries, _BCO_ 34-1 only specified that "other Presbyteries" could request the GA to assume original jurisdiction. Sixteen years later in 1989, based on a recommendation from the Ad Interim Committee on the GA, it was amended to specify “two other Presbyteries.” (PCA then had 45 Presbyteries.) This change also conformed 34-1 to 33-1, which already required two Sessions to petition a Presbytery for AOJ ( _M17GA_, p. 55). Twelve years later in 2001, Evangel Presbytery brought an overture seeking to amend 33-1 and 34-1, but the GA answered in the negative ( _M29GA_, pp. 203-205). The following year, _BCO_ 34-1 was revisited when 23 Presbyteries overtured the 2002 gain birmingham to increase the petitioning threshold from “two other Presbyteries” to “at least 10% of all the Presbyteries.” The Birmingham GA adopted that overture and sent it to the 64 Presbyteries for vote. While 40 Presbyteries voted in favor of the increase (62%), it was three short of the 2/3 required and was not adopted ( _M30GA_, pp. 214-219 & _M31GA_, pp. 51-53). Six years later in 2009, Central Carolina Presbytery overtured the GA again to revise 34-1 and 33-1, but the Overtures Committee recommended against adoption and the GA declined to adopt the Overture. That overture would have allowed a higher court to AOJ in any circumstance, even (presumably) after a full trial, and many had concerns about “double jeopardy.” No Double Jeopardy - This change does not pertain to someone who has been tried and acquitted. It pertains to an accused person whom the court of original jurisdiction declines to indict. “Ordering” Trials - Without this proposed change, some trials could be quite peculiar. There have been instances in the PCA where a Presbytery declined to indict an accused minister after conducting a _BCO_ 31-2 investigation. Then, a complaint was filed against the non-indictment and the SJC sustained the complaint and essentially instructed the Presbytery to indict and conduct a trial. (See Case 2009-06: Bordwine v. Pacific Northwest). But this results in an awkward situation where a Presbytery might put a man on trial whom it does not believe should be put on trial. The Presbytery would be indicting a man, and going through the time and expense of a trial, when it does not believe sufficient reason exists for one. …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
