# GA41 O2 — Amend BCO 5-1, 5-2, 5-9 and Add Sections 5-11 and 5-12 Regarding Mission Churches

**Assembly:** 41st (2013)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 2 from North Texas (to CCB [ RAO 8-2.b3],  ·  **Disposition:** Referred  ·  **BCO:** 5-1, 5-2, 5-9

*Source: [ga41_2013 p. 818](../markdown/ga41_2013.md#ga41-p818)*

---

“Amend _BCO_ 5-1, 5-2, 5-9; and MNA [ _RAO_ 14-1], OC [ _RAO_ 11-5]) Add New Sections 5-11, 5-12 Regarding Mission Churches”

**Whereas,** the current _BCO_ 5 does not make provision for the constitution of a “mission church” by request of the “core group” and action of the Presbytery; and

**Whereas,** the current _BCO_ 5 does not allow for the calling of a TE to “plant” a mission church prior to the existence of a core group; and

**Whereas,** this practice is a common and recognized practice in PCA church planting; and

**Whereas,** the role of the Presbytery in examining and approving initial officer nominees is omitted when an “organizing commission” of Presbytery is responsible for ordaining and installing the initial nominees for officers in the mission church; and

**Whereas,** there is no clear provision on the authority of the Presbytery to “close” a mission church that for one reason or another has not proven to be viable; and

**Whereas,** clarification is needed in the matter of the process for churches outside of the PCA wishing to join the PCA; **Be it therefore resolved** that the North Texas Presbytery overture the 41 [st] General Assembly of the PCA to amend Chapter 5 of the _BCO_ as follows: ~~[Strike-through~~ indicates deletions; underlining indicates additions.] **5-1.** A mission church may be properly described in the same manner as the particular church is described in _BCO_ 41. It is distinguished from a particular church in that it has no permanent governing body, and thus must be governed or supervised by others. However, its goal is to mature and be organized as a particular church as soon as this can be done decently and in good order. If the mission church is located outside the bounds of a Presbytery, the responsibility may be exercised through the General Assembly’s Committee on Mission to North America or Mission to the World, as the case may be, according to the _Rules of Assembly Operations_ . In such case the powers of the Presbytery in the following provisions shall be exercise by the General Assembly through its appropriate committee. **5-2.** Ordinarily, the responsibility for initiation and oversight of a mission church lies with a Presbytery, exercised through its committee on Mission to North America, or by a Session, in cooperation with Presbytery's committee on Mission to North America. ~~However~~ ~~**,**~~ A mission church may be formed by: ~~a. if an independent gathering of believers desires to~~ ~~form a congregation of the Presbyterian Church in~~ ~~America, they shall submit to the appropriate~~ ~~Presbytery a written request to come under~~ ~~Presbytery oversight. Upon approval of said request,~~ ~~the gathering will be assigned a temporary~~ ~~government (~~ ~~_BCO_~~ ~~5-3), which government shall~~ ~~take steps to oversee the election of a pastor~~ ~~according to~~ ~~_BCO_~~ ~~5-9.f.(1). The Presbytery will~~ ~~follow~~ ~~_BCO_~~ ~~13-8 when it applies.~~ ~~b. if the mission church is located outside the bounds~~ ~~of a Presbytery, the responsibility may be exercised~~ ~~through the General Assembly’s Committee on~~ ~~Mission to North America or Committee on Mission~~ ~~to the World, as the case may be, according to the~~ ~~_Rules of Assembly Operations_~~ ~~. In such a case the~~ ~~powers of the Presbytery in the following provisions~~ ~~shall be exercised by the General Assembly through~~ ~~its appropriate committee.~~ a. a presbytery calling a mission church pastor/planter (or in limited situations an Evangelist) in the Presbytery; or b. An existing particular church assigning or calling a pastor for the purpose of starting a new mission church with some support from its body; or c. An independent gathering of believers desiring to form a congregation of the Presbyterian Church in America. They shall submit to the appropriate Presbytery a written request to come under Presbytery oversight. Upon approval of said request, the gathering will be assigned a temporary government ( _BCO_ 5-3), which government shall take steps to oversee the election of a pastor according to _BCO_ 5-9.f.(1). The Presbytery will follow _BCO_ 13-8 when it applies. Or, d. Any group of individuals gathered for the purpose of forming a mission church. They shall make written request through the Presbytery’s Mission to North America Committee to the Presbytery to be constituted a Mission Church of the Presbyterian Church in America. [Note: No amendments proposed to 5-3 through 5-8.] **5-3.** The mission church, because of its transitional condition, requires a temporary system of government. Depending on the circumstances and at its own discretion, Presbytery may provide for such government in one of several ways: - **a.** Appoint an evangelist as prescribed in with _BCO_ 8-6. - **b.** Cooperate with the Session of a particular church in arranging a mother-daughter relationship with a mission church. The Session may then serve as the temporary governing body of the mission church. - **c.** Appoint a _BCO_ 15-1 commission to serve as a temporary Session of the mission church. When a minister of the Presbytery has been approved to serve as pastor of the mission church, he shall be included as a member of the commission and serve as its moderator. **5-4.** Pastoral ministry for the mission church may be provided: - **a.** by a minister of the Presbytery called by Presbytery to serve as pastor, or - **b.** by stated, student, or ruling elder supply ( _BCO_ 22-5, -6), or - **c.** by a series of qualified preachers approved by the temporary government ( _BCO_ 12-5.e). **5-5.** The temporary government shall receive members ( _BCO_ 12-5.a) into the mission church according to the provisions of _BCO_ 57 so far as they may be applicable. As members of the mission church those received are communing or non-communing members of the Presbyterian Church in America. a. If there is a minister approved by Presbytery to serve the mission church as its pastor ( _BCO_ 5-4.a), each member so received shall be understood to assent to the call of that minister and to affirm the promises made to the pastor in _BCO_ 21-10. b. Meetings of the members of the mission church shall be governed according to the provisions of _BCO_ 25 so far as they may be applicable. **5-6.** Mission churches and their members shall have the right of judicial process to the court having oversight of their temporary governing body. **5-7.** Mission churches shall maintain a roll of communicant and non-communicant members, in the same manner as, but separate from, other particular churches. **5-8.** It is the intention of the Presbyterian Church in America that mission churches enjoy the same status as particular churches in relation to civil government. **5-9.** A new church can be organized only by the authority of Presbytery. - **a.** A Presbytery should establish standing rules setting forth the prerequisites that qualify a mission church to begin the organization process, e.g., the minimum number of petitioners and the level of financial support to be provided by the congregation. The number of officers sufficient to constitute the quorum for a session shall be necessary to complete the organization process. - **b.** The temporary government of the mission church in coordination with the Mission to North America of the Presbytery shall oversee the steps necessary for organization and request the Presbytery to appoint a separate commission to examine the officer candidates and to organize the church. c. When the training and examination are completed and the temporary government and the commission determine ~~s~~ that among the members of the mission congregation there are men who appear qualified as officers, the nomination process shall begin and the election conclude following the procedures of _BCO_ 24 so far as they may be applicable. d. The election of officers shall normally take place at least two weeks prior to the date of the organization service. However, the effective date of service for the newly elected officers shall be upon the completion of the organization service. - **e.** If deacons are not elected, the duties of the office shall devolve upon the session, until deacons can be secured. - **f.** If there is a called mission church pastor/ planter or a minister approved by Presbytery to serve the mission church as its pastor, and members of the mission church have been received according to _BCO_ 5-5, the temporary session shall call a congregational meeting at which the congregation may, by majority vote, call the organizing pastor to be their pastor without the steps of _BCO_ 20. If no such minister has been appointed, or the minister or congregation choose **s** not to continue the pastoral relationship of the newly organized church, a pastor shall be called as follows (1) The temporary government shall oversee the election of a pastor according the provisions of _BCO_ 20 so far as they are applicable. If a candidate is to be proposed before the organization, the congregational meeting to elect a pastor shall take place early enough for Presbytery to consider and approve the pastor’s call prior to the service of organization. This may be the same meeting called for the election of other officers. (2) The ordination and/or installation shall be according to the provisions of _BCO_ 21 so far as they are applicable. The service may take place at the service of organization. [Note: No amendment to 5-10.] **5-10.** Upon organization, the newly elected session should meet as soon as is practicable to elect a stated clerk and formulate a budget. if there is no pastor, the session may elect as moderator one of their own number or any teaching elder of the Presbytery with Presbytery’s approval. Further, if there is no pastor, action shall be taken to secure, as soon as practicable, the regular administration of Word and Sacraments.” _**[Add new sections 5-11 and 5-12**_ 5-11 Prior to organization as a particular church, the mission church may be dissolved by the Presbytery upon the recommendation of its Mission to North America committee. Insofar as possible, the provisions of _BCO_ 25-12 will apply. 5-12 In the event an existing non-PCA church is interested in coming into the PCA, the MNA Committee of the applicable Presbytery should work with the church leadership to determine whether the church should come into the PCA as a mission church or seek Presbytery approval to be received under the provisions of _BCO_ 13-8. _Approved by North Texas Presbytery at its stated meeting,_ _November 3, 2012_ _Attested by /s/ TE David M. Frierson, stated clerk_

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
