# GA41 O12 — Amend BCO 20-6 Regarding Terms of Call & Add Appendix J

**Assembly:** 41st (2013)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 12 from Pacific Northwest Presbytery (to CCB, OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Approved → sent to presbyteries; ratification not located  ·  **BCO:** 20-6

*Source: [ga41_2013 p. 840](../markdown/ga41_2013.md#ga41-p840)*

---

> *SENT DOWN TO PRESBYTERIES: Proposed Amendments to BCO: BCO 34-8; 37-6; 43-10 — BCO 20-6 not included; as amended by the Overtures Committee the overture added only Appendix J (a sample form) without amending BCO 20-6 language, so no constitutional ratification was required.*

“Amend _BCO_ 20-6 Regarding Terms of Call and add _BCO_ Appendix J, Sample Form” Amend _BCO_ 20-6 as follows and add sample form (attached) to _BCO_ as Appendix J. ~~[Strike-through~~ indicates deletions; underlining indicates additional/changed wording. Note: bold format is used for the entire paragraph in the current _BCO_ . Bold does not indicate change.] 20-6. Form of call: The terms of the call shall be approved by the congregation in the following or like form. (See also the sample form in _BCO_ Appendix J.) **The ___________ Church being on sufficient** **grounds well satisfied of the ministerial qualifications of** **you, ________, and having good hopes from our** **knowledge of your labors that your ministrations in the** **Gospel will be profitable to our spiritual interests, do** **earnestly call you to undertake the pastoral office in said** **congregation, promising you, in the discharge of your** **duty, all proper support, encouragement and obedience** **in the Lord. That you may be free from worldly cares** **and avocations, we hereby promise and oblige ourselves** **to pay you** ~~**the sum of**~~ **a combined salary and housing** **allowance of $___________ a year in regular** ~~**monthly (or**~~ **-** **-** ~~**quarterly)**~~ **_______ (semi** **monthly, bi** **weekly, monthly or** **quarterly) payments.** ~~**, and**~~ **In addition to the salary and** **housing allowance, we will also provide** **other benefits,** **such as, manse** **(with equity allowance),** **Social Security** **allowance, retirement** **savings,** **medical insurance,** **life** **-** **insurance,** **long** **term disability insurance, leaves of** **absence, sabbaticals, vacations, moving expenses etc.,** **during the time of your being and continuing the regular** **pastor of this church.** **In testimony whereof we have respectively** **subscribed our names this ___ day of ____, A.D.___.** **Attest: I, having moderated the congregational** **meeting which extended a call to ____________ for his** **ministerial services, do certify that the call has been** **made in all respects according to the rules laid down in** **the** _**Book of Church Order,**_ **and that the persons who** **signed the foregoing call were authorized to do so by vote** **of the congregation.** _________________________________ Moderator of the Meeting Rationale: 1. The current wording in 20-6 is more than 100 years old and could benefit from updating. (It’s almost identical to the Form in the _BCO_ of 1879.) It is not as complete, current, or helpful a sit needs to be. While some things are timeless (like the principle of a congregation ultimately having authority to decide the Terms), the _format_ of a Call is not timeless and should reflect contemporary details. 2. In addition to updating the wording in 20-6, it would be helpful to have a Sample Form. This could be done by adding _BCO_ Appendix J (attached). Eventually, the Form could be downloadable from the AC and/or RBI websites. With a slight reformat of font size and margins, it could fit on the smaller _BCO_ page size. Use of any Sample Form would remain optional for a congregation because _BCO_ appendices are not constitutionally binding. The proposed Appendix J is adapted from the PCA “Call Package Guidelines” prepared last year by RBI and could be updated by RBI as necessary. http://www.pcarbi.org/wpcontent/uploads/Call%20Package%20Guidelines %202012% 20Final.pdf 3. Last year, the Louisville GA adopted the following recommendation from the Committee of Commissioners on RBI: “And, that the General Assembly exhort Presbyteries and member churches to implement the PCA TE Call Package Guidelines as PCA churches and organizations evaluate teaching elder compensation and benefits” ( _M40GA_, p. 52). Revising 20-6 and providing a Sample Form will help churches implement these guidelines. 4. Other denominations provide sample forms for their congregations to consider. For example PCUSA http://www.pcusa.org/resource/pastoral-call-form-word document/ EPC http://epc.org/resources/download-epc-forms/ RCA http://images.rca.org/docs/leadership/MinisterCallForm.pdf _Considered by the Pacific Northwest Presbytery at its stated meeting,_ _January 25, 2013, and referred to a Commission appointed at that_ _meeting. Commission approved the overture on March 1, 2013_ _Attested by /s/ RE Howard Donahoe, stated clerk_ **Attachment to Overture 12** _BCO_ Appendix J - Sample Form for Terms of Call. Subject to the approval of the _______________ Presbytery, the __________ ( _Session, or Congregation,_ _or Session on behalf of the congregation_ ) of _____________________Church in ____________________ earnestly calls you __________________, to undertake the office of ___________________ in our congregation, promising you, in the discharge of your duty, all proper support, encouragement and obedience in the Lord. That you may be free from worldly care and avocations, we hereby promise and oblige ourselves to provide you with the following: Annual Cash Salary & Housing Allowance, paid ___________ ( _semi-monthly, etc._ ) $ __________ The amount/portion dedicated to housing allowance will be determined by the Minister and approved by the Session before employment with the church in this new position and shall be reviewed prior to each fiscal year. Primary Benefits Social Security/Medicare Allowance: ____ % of salary + housing $ __________ Medical Insurance &/or Medicare Supplement Insurance (specific $ amount) $ __________ Retirement Savings: ___ % of salary + housing $ __________ Long Term Disability Insurance: enough to replace ___% of salary + housing $ __________ Life Insurance: amount equal to ____ x (salary + housing) $ __________ Equity Allowance if Minister living in a manse $ __________ Other _______________ $ __________ Secondary Benefits Dental Insurance $ __________ Vision Insurance $ __________ Long Term Care Insurance $ __________ Temporary Benefits Relocation expenses reimbursed up to a maximum of: $ __________ Other _______________ __________ [continued on next page] [Sample Form, continued] Miscellaneous Paid Leaves per year. (Any specific church policies are described in a separate document.) Vacation ___ days Sick Leave ___ days Educational Leave ___ days Paternity Leave ___ days Sabbatical Leave accrual ___ days Funeral Leave ___ days [Form continued on next page] Any reimbursement of reasonable and necessary business expenses shall be in accord with a Sessionadopted Accountable Reimbursement Plan, with a maximum amount specified in the annual church budget. I, having moderated the ________________________ ( _Session or Congregational)_ meeting which extended a call to______________________________ for his ministerial services, do certify the call has been made in all respects according to the rules in the PCA Book of Church Order and the persons who signed the call were authorized to do so by vote of the _______________ _(Session or Congregation)_ . ( _Check if applicable_ ) ___ Authority to approve these Terms was delegated by the Congregation to the Session at a congregational meeting on __________________ (date). Meeting Moderator (sign) _________________________ Print name ____________________________ Position _______________________________________Phone or email __________________________ Date of Meeting ___________________________________ Vote: # Yes = ______ # No = ______ Minister-Elect (sign) ____________________________Print name _______________________________ Send a copy to the Presbytery Clerk. ______________________________

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
