# GA42 O39 — Affirm Overture 6 on Child Protection with Supporting Documents

**Assembly:** 42nd (2014)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 39 from Westminster Presbytery (to OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered by reference

*Source: [ga42_2014 p. 842](../markdown/ga42_2014.md#ga42-p842)*

---

“Affirm Overture 6 Regarding Child Protection in the PCA – with Supporting Documents”

**Whereas** Georgia Foothills Presbytery has sent an overture to the 42 [nd] General Assembly calling on the General Assembly to speak to the issue of child sexual abuse (Overture 6: “Child Protection in the PCA”); and

**Whereas** Westminster Presbytery believes that child sexual abuse is an issue to which the General Assembly should speak; and

**Whereas** Westminster Presbytery endorses the substance of Overture 6 from Georgia Foothills Presbytery on child sexual abuse;

**Therefore, be it resolved,** that Westminster Presbytery urges the 42 [nd] General Assembly to answer in the affirmative Overture 6 from Georgia Foothills Presbytery on child sexual abuse. _Approved by Westminster Presbytery at its stated meeting on April 12, 2014._ _Attested: /s/ TE Daniel J. Foreman, Stated Clerk_ **Supporting Documents:** I. The Georgia Foothills overture which is being endorsed by the Westminster JC overture. II. Some background on the Georgia Foothills overture by TE Mike Sloane. **I. Georgia Foothills Overture Being Endorsed [see p. 798]** **II. Statement Regarding Overture 6 by TE Mike Sloan:** 1. Background Most of you know that the short statement on child sexual abuse brought by the Overtures Committee to the floor of the 41st General Assembly in Greenville, SC, was sent back to the Overtures Committee to be reconsidered at the 42nd General Assembly in Houston. In Greenville, the sentiment on the floor was that this statement was not nearly strong enough because it did not even encourage our churches to report this horrific sin to the civil authorities. With all due respect to my dear fathers and brothers on the Overtures Committee, it was clear to me that very few in the room had any education or training in child sexual abuse awareness and prevention. This year has given me time to seek out more input from PCA experts on this issue. Ten of us gathered back in December in Sarasota, FL, to work on a strong statement that would help churches understand the current situation and encourage them to lead in protecting children: Amy Aldrich, PCA Member, Sarasota, FL Advocate for victims of child sexual abuse Ken Aldrich, PCA Teaching Elder, Sarasota, FL Senior Pastor, Covenant Life Presbyterian Church Advocate for victims of child sexual abuse Steve Collins, PCA Member, Gainesville, GA Founder and Executive Director of _Adults Protecting Children_ Beth Hart, PCA Member, Sarasota, FL Trained Facilitator of _Stewards of Children_ Abuse Prevention Training Dr. Diane Langberg, PCA Member, Philadelphia, PA Author, International Speaker, Counselor of 35 years working with trauma survivors (including victims of child sexual abuse and pastors who have abused Chair of the Executive Board of the American Association of Christian Counselors Adjunct Professor of Practical Theology, Westminster Theological Seminary Dr. Duncan Rankin, PCA Teaching Elder, Houston, TX Associate Pastor, Christ Church PCA Adjunct Professor of Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary Board member of _GRACE_ (Godly response to abuse ina Christian Environment) John Robertson, PCA Teaching Elder, Lawrenceville, GA PCA Administrative Committee Business Administrator Mike Sloan, PCA Teaching Elder, Duluth, GA Associate Pastor, Old Peachtree Presbyterian Church Trained Facilitator of _Stewards of Children_ Abuse Prevention Training Dr. Roy Taylor, PCA Teaching Elder, Lawrenceville, GA Stated Clerk of the PCA Boz Tchividjian, PCA Ruling Elder, Lynchburg, VA Founder and Executive Director of _GRACE_ (Godly Response to Abuse in a Christian Environment) Professor at Liberty University School of Law Former Assistant State Attorney, Seventh Judicial Circuit, Chief Prosecutor, Sexual Crimes Division Some of us have expertise in the area of child sexual abuse as professional counselors or consultants or legal experts. Some of us have practical ministry experience walking alongside victims of child sexual abuse. All of us personally know victims of child sexual abuse. Some of us have family who are survivors of child sexual abuse. Some of us are survivors of child sexual abuse. The ten of us love the PCA and our heart for the PCA is that together we would see more clearly the great need of the current situation and lead in creating an environment of protection for kids in our churches. The spirit in our discussions was not one of selfrighteousness or blame, but of concern for kids in the PCA who need protecting. a statement of this nature can always be tweaked a little more but careful thought from these PCA experts went into each word. 2. why do we need a statement? Why do we need it if the Bible already speaks to it? Should we pass a statement against every sin? Of course not, but there are times when the current situation calls for a timely statement. Think of Ezra and the issue of intermarriage with non-believers. That was clearly addressed in the Torah, and yet Ezra spoke boldly and prophetically before all of the people because of the situation. We the PCA have done this on many occasions, speaking on Abortion, Divorce, and Pornography to give a few examples. A statement like this is in conformity with our grassroots polity. A statement of this nature is simply urging churches to engage and take measures in line with the Scriptures and our standards. This is not a mandate, it can’t be. It is a timely exhortation to the brothers. Speaking clearly and publicly helps bring deeds of darkness into the light (Ephesians 5:11) and it tells the victims of child sexual abuse – and there are many in our pews – that this is not their fault and we are committed to protecting children. If we know there is an ox capable of goring and we don’t do something about it, the God clearly says we are culpable (Exodus 21:29). In our day, given what we have learned in the past few years about child sexual abuse, we cannot pretend that we do not know there are oxen capable of goring. Let’s speak up for the little ones Jesus loves (Mark 10:14). 3. Child Sexual Abuse is an issue in the PCA I didn’t know everyone’s story in the room in December when we wrote this statement. I do know that three of ten in the room were personally victims of child sexual abuse. I also know that number is five of ten if you include those of us who have had immediate family who were victims. I know an RUF campus pastor who is currently ministering to seventeen students who were victims of child sexual abuse. Not seventeen over the life of his ministry – seventeen current students in his RUF chapter. Let that sink in for a minute. I know two pastors who have had their daughters sexually assaulted in the PCA churches they were serving at the time. One of my best friends knows a man who was found to be serially molesting his own granddaughter. This man is a long-time PCA member and has been a leader in Bible Study Fellowship. I could tell you many other stories of abuse from people I know personally. I know of multiple cases where the PCA church did not report the abuse. One of the two PCA pastors I mentioned, the elders and the pastor at the time knew about the abuser was guilty of child rape but did not call the authorities. When my friend was called to come pastor the church he knew something was not right in the church, but before he could figure it out his own young daughter was sexually assaulted by the same abuser. Dr. Diane Langberg told me this story personally. Several years ago the then current head of woman’s ministry in the PCA was talking with Dr. Langberg about child sexual abuse. She said to Dr. Langberg, “I’m so glad we don’t have this in the PCA.” Dr. Langberg told her at her next women’s ministry conference to list child sexual abuse as an issue faced by women and see what happens. She said don’t even mention it, just list it in one of the handouts. A few months later the head of women’s ministry called Dr. Langberg and said, “What do I do? They are coming out of the woodwork!” Brothers, I love the PCA. because i love the pc ai want us to be honest and say this is an issue in our churches. There is a huge false sense of security that this is not happening in the PCA. This statement will exhort us to wake up and act with courage for the sake of vulnerable kids. 4. The Need for Leadership Child sexual abuse thrives in environments where there are abusers and other adults who are unaware and/or unwilling to create an environment of accountability around children. Over the past few decades, we have learned a great deal about child sexual abuse and how to prevent it. Because of our theology of covenant children, we should lead the way in following these safeguards, and these practices should become as routine as buckling our children into seat belts. Some of us resent that we have to have laws about seatbelts. I understand, but we are not even talking about a law. We are talking about an exhortation that says following wellinformed and established practices for child protection ought to be part of our service to Christ as we join his efforts to prevent anyone from harming one of his little ones. For decades, we have put the burden on children to come forward if they are being abused. This status quo has failed. The antidote to child sexual abuse is faithful adults working together to create a safe environment for children. Our confession rightly emphasizes the biblical notion that those in authority must protect anyone in their care ( _WLC_ 130). The Prophets again and again chastise God’s people because they are not speaking up and protecting the vulnerable (Isaiah 1:17; Zechariah 7:9-10). They even chastise the shepherds who prey on the sheep themselves instead of protecting them (Ez. 34:1-10). Lack of awareness has led to a lack of training and responsible actions and thousands of kids in the PCA are vulnerable as a result. I have no hesitation saying that this resolution will help save children who are currently unprotected.

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
