# GA42 O52 — Adopt an Official Seal & Logo for the PCA

**Assembly:** 42nd (2014)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 52 from Southeast Alabama Presbytery (to AC)  ·  **Disposition:** Referred

*Source: [ga42_2014 p. 82](../markdown/ga42_2014.md#ga42-p82)*

---

“Seal/Logo for PCA” **Communications** i have a communication from Dr. Leith Anderson, President of the National Association of Evangelicals which states. Thank you for the kind invitation to represent the National Association of Evangelicals at the 42nd General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America. While it will not be possible for me to attend due to previous commitments, I send greetings to the Presbyterian Church in America on behalf of the National Association of Evangelicals, and I pray that the assembly is a great success and that it furthers sincere and robust engagement. May God bless and encourage all who gather in Houston. i have received a communication from Dr. Douw Breed of the Reformed Churches of South Africa which states, The GKSA tries to send delegates every three years to the General Assemblies of churches with which we have ecumenical ties. It will therefore not be possible for us to attend the Assembly of the PCA this year. We assure you that our ties with PCA are very important to us. We pray that our Lord may bless your meeting and that He will guide you by his Word and Spirit. i have received a communication from the Rt. Rev. Dr. Ray Sutton of the Reformed Episcopal Church which states, I will not be able to attend the PCA General Assembly. I have asked, however, the Very Rev. Dr. Jonathan Riches, Academic Dean of the Reformed Episcopal Seminary in Philadelphia to attend in my place to represent the REC and the Anglican Church of North America. . . . Thank you again for this kind invitation. The REC has tremendous respect for the PCA and has always shared so much in common in faith and history. **Committee on Constitutional Business** - Since the last General Assembly I have sought the advice of the CCB on one matter ( _RAO_ 8-2.b.1). - I have received three non-judicial references to the CCB ( _RAO_ 82.b.2). - I also referred to the CCB all proposed amendments to the _BCO_ ( _RAO_ 11-5). **Presbytery Votes on the** _**Book of Church Order**_ **Amendments** . _**BCO**_ 26-2 requires an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the Presbyteries as part of the amendment process. The two items originally sent down for vote by the Forty-first General Assembly require the affirmative vote of fifty-four Presbyteries, since we now have eighty-one Presbyteries. - The 41 [st] General Assembly gave initial approval to a proposed amendment to _BCO_ 34-8 and 37-6 to “require a two-thirds majority vote to remove censure of deposition if imposed for scandalous conduct.” - The 41 [st] General Assembly gave initial approval to a proposed amendment to _BCO_ 43-10 to “require the higher court to accept a reference if the higher court has sustained a complaint against anon indictment ina doctrinal case or case of public scandal.” Both of the proposed _BCO_ amendments initially approved by the 41 [st] General Assembly have now received an affirmative vote of over 54 (2/3) of the presbyteries. **Presbytery Votes on Amendments Sent Down by 41** **[st]** **General Assembly** **(as of May 23, 2014)** |Col1|Amend:|For|Against| |---|---|---|---| |Item 1|_BCO _34-8 and 37-6|67|3| |Item 2|_BCO_ 43-10|65|5| [For the complete record of the votes by presbyteries see Attachment, pp. 90-96.] **Standing Judicial Commission** I serve as clerk of the Standing Judicial Commission. The SJC is required to have an annual meeting in March and may have other meetings as the case load warrants. The SJC met for its annual meeting March 6-7, 2014, and had additional meetings, October 18, 2013, December 3, 2013, February 25, 2014, and April 23, 2014. Though the intention for funding the SJC was that it would be funded through a portion of each General Assembly Commissioner Registration Fee, that has not proven to be sufficient. The Administrative Committee has been subsidizing the SJC for a number of years. **Cooperative Ministries Committee** The CMC was established as a result of the Strategic Planning Process. It is composed of the six most recent moderators of the General Assembly, the chairmen of the General Assembly Committees and Agencies, and the coordinators and presidents of the General Assembly Committees and Agencies. The CMC met January 21-22, 2014, for its annual meeting. As secretary of the CMC, I worked with the current moderator to prepare the agenda ( _RAO_ 7-4.c). Matters requiring Assembly action were referred to the appropriate Committees or Agencies ( _RAO_ 7-3 c.). **Statistics** Our statistics give us some insights into the health of our churches and denomination. Our statistics are mixed, with some increases and some decreases. Our membership is a net gain of .82% per year. Some statistics for 2013 as compared with 2012 are: - Churches and missions – 1,808, an increase of 21 - Total professions of faith – 9,237, a decrease of 8 - Ministers – 4,416, an increase of 95. - Candidates for ministry – 366, a decrease of 202 - Licentiates – 88, a decrease of 40. - Total membership (Communicants, ministers & noncommunicants)– 367,033, an increase of 3,014 - Total Family Units – 139,364, an increase of 2,033 - Sunday School Attendance – 103,911, a decrease of 1,624 - Per capita Giving – $2,654, an increase of $74 - Per Capita Benevolences – $464, an increase of $24 - Total Reported Contributions – $ 763,985,123, an increase of $26,817,256 **Churches Added or Lost to the Denomination** **V. CHURCHES ADDED TO THE DENOMINATION IN 2013** **Presbytery** **Church** **Location** **Date Rec.** **Source** Blue Ridge Mercy Forest, VA Organized Calvary Blythewood Blythewood, SC 05/05/13 Organized C. Carolina Faith Comm Prague, Czech Rep 10/13/13 Organized E. Canada Providence Comm St. Catherines, ON 01/26/13 Independency E. Carolina Trinity Park Morrisville, NC 11/03/13 Organized Evangel Hope Comm Jacksonville, AL 09/15/13 Organized GA Foothills ChristChurch Suwanee, GA Organized James River Crosswater Chesapeake, VA 10/13/13 Organized Grace Chesapeake, VA 05/12/13 Organized Metro NYC All Souls Comm Nanuet, NY Organized NY State First Unionville, NY 05/21/13 PCUSA N. Illinois Grace Fellowship Freeport, IL 06/09/13 Independency NW Georgia Christ Covenant Woodstock, GA 07/13 Organized Ohio Valley New City Cincinnati, OH 02/17/13 Organized Pacific Grace Pasadena Pasadena, CA 08/13 Organized Palmetto Blythewood Blythewood, SC 05/05/13 Organized Piedmont Triad Christ Church Greensboro, NC 08/18/13 Organized Providence Cornerstone Huntsville, AL 05/19/13 Organized S. New Engl Covenant Millers Falls, MA 01/19/13 Non-denom SE Louisiana St. Roch Comm New Orleans, LA Organized Southwest Las Tierras Comm El Paso, TX 01/24/13 Organized **VI. CHURCHES LOST FROM THE DENOMINATION IN 2013** **Presbytery** **Church** **Address** **Date** **To** Covenant New Beginnings Memphis, TN 05/28/13 Dissolved E. PA Evangelical Levittown, PA 11/16/13 Dissolved Evangel First Gadsden, AL 05/15/13 Independency K. Southern Korean Bethel Dallas, TX 04/15/13 Dissolved Metro NYC Village New York, NY 03/19/13 Dissolved Ohio Pleasant Valley Clev-Parma, OH 05/13 Independency Ohio Valley Ch of the Coven’t Cincinnati, OH 08/03/13 OPC Pacific NW Agape Auburn, WA Withdrawn Potomac Covenant Burtonsville, MD 03/16/13 Withdrawn Southwest Dove Mountain Oro Valley, AZ 09/19/13 Dissolved W. Canada Mtnview Comm Aggasiz, BC 12/04/13 Dissolved **VII. MINISTERS ADDED TO THE DENOMINATION IN 2013** **Presbytery** **Name of Minister** **Date Rec.** **Source** Blue Ridge John Dowlen Ordained Charles Nall EPC Tag Tuck Ordained Calvary Jason Cornwell 05/05/13 Ordained Matthew Icard 05/05/13 Ordained C. Carolina Wesley Ryan Andrews 03/24/13 Ordained Joe Arnold 06/02/13 Ordained Cody Mitchell Janicek 09/08/13 Ordained Heath McLaughen 10/06/13 Ordained Jason Piteo 09/29/13 Ordained C. Georgia Jeff Barkhouse 06/30/13 Ordained Joshua Garrett 09/22/13 Ordained Randy Saye 10/06/13 Ordained C. Indiana Jeff Nottingham 11/09/13 Ordained Chesapeake Steven Dallwig Ordained Daniel Passerelli Ordained Chicago Metro Erik Borggren 05/19/13 Ordained Covenant Stephen Atkinson 02/24/13 EPC John Clayton 06/02/13 Ordained Nicholas Davelaar 07/14/13 CRC Bradford Green 08/04/13 Ordained Kenneth Hargis 07/21/13 Ordained E. Carolina P. David Chu Bruce Clark 09/22/13 Ordained Alexander R. Ford 08/11/13 Ordained Cole McLaughlin Charles T. Pearson Timothy Hunter Price 05/25/13 Ordained Crawford Michael Stevener 06/30/13 Ordained Simon Stokes 10/18/13 Ordained Evangel Harrison Hatfield Rick Hutchinson 03/10/13 Ordained Andy Wyatt Fellowship Mark Ashbaugh 11/17/13 Ordained Michael Cosner Ordained GA Foothills Daniel Henderson Ordained Brady Nelson 02/10/13 Ordained Great Lakes Scott Shaw 10/13/13 Ordained Gulf Coast Andy Aikens 02/12/13 Ref Bapt Houston Metro Quique Autrey 04/19/13 Ordained Bojan Dragicevic Ordained Juan Carlos Martinez 04/19/13 Ordained Illiana Curran Bishop 01/12/13 Ordained James River John Bourgeois 10/27/13 Ordained PD Mayfield 07/06/13 Ordained Ben Shear 02/10/13 Ordained Ambrose Winfree 11/03/13 Ordained Korean SE Paul Jay Cha 04/09/13 Ordained Jae Dok Hong 04/09/13 Ordained Young Su Jeong 04/09/13 Ordained Korean S. Yong Ho Choi 04/15/13 KAPC Jeongsu Jung 10/27/13 Ordained Jin Yong Song 10/23/13 Ordained Korean SW Daniel Park 03/12/13 Ordained Metro Atlanta James Brock Dave Lindberg 02/17/13 Ordained Metro NYC Aaron Bjerke Ordained MS Valley Ryan Biese Wiley Lowry Missouri Scott Chaplain Craig Doctor Ordained Matt Esswein Tony Howard Patrick Weston 08/04/13 Ordained Jesse York Nashville David Burden 03/10/13 Ordained Cameron Clausing 08/25/13 Ordained New River Mark Kozak NY State James Farinacci 12/04/13 CCCC Jonathan Hood 11/24/13 Ordained North Texas Lee Bridgeman Ordained John Martin Buerger Ordained Justin Hilliard 11/16/13 Ordained Brent Horan 12/15/13 Ordained Brian Tsui Ordained Thomas Warmath Ordained N. New Engl Nathan Snyder Ordained N. Illinois Greg Grindinger 01/13/13 Ordained NW Georgia Wes Calton 08/13 Ordained Ross Ritter 01/13 OPC Ohio Edward Morris 02/17/13 Independency Tyson Turner 03/17/13 Ordained Ohio Valley Brian Ferry 11/03/13 Ordained Pacific Paul Ranheim 06/30/13 Ordained Drew Sokol 09/28/13 Ordained Jeff Tell 07/07/13 Ordained Pacific NW Brant Bosserman Drew Burdette Paul Choi Brian Douglas Daniel Robbins Palmetto Charles G. Bowen 02/03/13 Ordained Joseph Garris 04/28/13 Ordained Andrew Halbert 04/28/13 Ordained Brandon Lutz 11/17/13 Ordained Erwin Threatt 08/04/13 Baptist Philadelphia Enrique Leal 09/21/13 PC Colombia Piedmont Triad Austin Pfeiffer Ordained Pittsburgh Robert Schmidtberger 08/18/13 Ordained Potomac Daniel Morgan Mayfield 03/03/13 Ordained Mike Samuel Park 09/17/13 KAPC Providence Stephen Hooks 02/12/13 Ordained Rocky Mtn Matt Holst Ordained Byron Longenecker 06/02/13 Ordained Savannah Riv John Barrett 02/10/13 Ordained Soren Kornegay 09/25/13 Ordained Charlie McCoy Turner 08/18/13 Ordained Peter Whitney 08/25/13 Ordained South Coast Eric Pilson Ordained Adriel Sanchez Ordained South Texas Jahaziel Cantu 02/13/13 Ordained Boyan Dragicevic 11/17/13 Ordained George Lacy 02/10/13 Ordained Jeff Schrage SE Alabama Jason Crenshaw 10/22/13 Ordained Robert Fossett 10/06/13 Ordained Caleb Galloway 06/09/13 Ordained Samuel Jake McCall 01/26/13 Ordained Brian Oaks 01/22/13 Ordained SE Louisiana Stuart Mills 02/17/13 Ordained S. New Engl Tim Chang 07/07/13 Ordained David Richter 03/07/13 Ordained Southwest Graydon A. Ewing 10/13/13 Ordained Luke T. Smith 10/13/13 Ordained Stephen P. Yates 10/27/13 Ordained SW Florida Brian March 10/13/13 Ordained James Nichols Ordained Philip Woods EPC Susq. Valley Jeff Cottone 04/28/13 Ordained David Viehman 03/10/13 Ordained W. Carolina Chris Horne 04/17/13 Ordained Brian Thomas 08/24/13 Ordained Wisconsin Michael Wenzler 08/18/13 Ordained **VIII. MINISTERS DISMISSED TO OTHER DENOMINATIONS IN 2013** **Presbytery** **Name of Minister** **Date** **To** C. Carolina Bruce Lax 11/26/13 PCUSA C. Indiana Scott Huber 05/10/13 OPC Metro Atlanta Richard Holmes EPC John Tinnin 05/13 EPC …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
