# GA42 O5 — Exhort Church Leaders to Prevent and Report Child Sexual Abuse

**Assembly:** 42nd (2014)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 5 from Westminster Presbytery (to OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Out of order

*Source: [ga42_2014 p. 794](../markdown/ga42_2014.md#ga42-p794)*

---

“Concerning Our Present Need” **CONCERNING OUR PRESENT NEED** We come as persons in the same predicament as all persons, yet who have been shown mercy by a gracious God, and who desire that the goodness and mercy of God be showered upon other individuals and our nation. We testify, with the Apostle Paul: I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has strengthened me, because He considered me faithful, putting me into service, even though i was formerly a blasphemer and a persecutor and a violent aggressor. yeti was shown mercy because i acted ignorantly in unbelief; and the grace of our Lord was more than abundant, with the faith and love which are _found_ in Christ Jesus. it is a trustworthy statement, deserving full acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, among whom I am foremost _of all._ Yet for this reason I found mercy, so that in me as the foremost, Jesus Christ might demonstrate His perfect patience as an example for those who would believe in Him for eternal life. Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only God, _be_ honor and glory forever and ever. Amen. I Timothy 1:12-17 We come as fellow sinners whom God has saved by His grace in Christ Jesus, who are examples that God can save anyone, no matter how deep or desperate their sin, and that God is glorified as He is shown to be the Lord who can save, reclaim, renovate, and restore those, like us, who were most entrenched in sinful hearts and actions. We confess that the Bible is the Word of the Living God, and that it is the measure and standard that evaluates us, not we the judge of it. For the word of God is living and active and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing as far as the division of soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow, and able to judge the thoughts and intentions of the heart. 13 And there is no creature hidden from His sight, but all things are open and laid bare to the eyes of Him with whom we have to do. Hebrews 4:13-14 You, however, continue in the things you have learned and become convinced of, knowing from whom you have learned _them_, and that from childhood you have known the sacred writings which are able to give you the wisdom that leads to salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is God-breathed and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for training in righteousness; so that the man of God may be adequate, equipped for every good work. II Timothy 3:14-17 With God’s Word as our standard, we find that it tells us plainly that we are all sinners, in need of the redemption purchased by Christ, in history, at the cross. For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, being justified as a gift by His grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus; whom God displayed publicly as a propitiation in His blood through faith. _This was_ to demonstrate His righteousness, because in the forbearance of God He passed over the sins previously committed; for the demonstration, _I say,_ of His righteousness at the present time, so that He would be just and the justifier of the one who has faith in Jesus. Where then is boasting? It is excluded. By what kind of law? Of works? No, but by a law of faith. For we maintain that a man is justified by faith apart from works of the Law. Or is God _the God_ of Jews only? Is He not _the God_ of Gentiles also? Yes, of Gentiles also, since indeed God who will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through faith is one. Do we then nullify the Law through faith? May it never be! On the contrary, we establish the Law. Romans 3:21-31 God is a moral God. We are sinners. Thus the dilemma—How can a holy, moral God, in love forgive sinners, not holding their sins against them, and still maintain His righteous character? In the wisdom of God this is resolved at the cross of Jesus Christ, when God’s own Son propitiated (appeased, satisfied the demands of) the holy justice of God, and suffered the full penalty for the sins of those that trust in Him IN THEIR PLACE. God did not compromise His law’s requirement that sin be punished, but upheld the sanctity of His law, yet in love provided His own beloved Son to bear the penalty of His law in the place of sinners. Thus, the continuing validity and relevance of the Law of God as the standard by which He judges all human conduct is established by His own action in history. In our current culture we believe it is our responsibility to declare the truth of God’s Word in the face of lawlessness being endorsed and promulgated, just as John the Baptist, in our Lord’s day, called King Herod to repent of breaking God’s law by his adultery with his brother’s wife (Matthew 14:3-4), and as the Apostle Paul called people to turn from their sin to Christ, when he said: The night is almost gone, and the day is near. Therefore let us lay aside the deeds of darkness and put on the armor of light. Let us behave properly as in the day, not in carousing and drunkenness, not in sexual promiscuity and sensuality, not in strife and jealousy. But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh in regard to _its_ lusts. Romans 13:12-14 In our current culture, there is need for the clarity that only God’s wisdom can bring to a situation where, as in the days of Isaiah the prophet, people are calling bad things good, and good things bad. Woe to those who call evil good, and good evil; Who substitute darkness for light and light for darkness; Who substitute bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter! Woe to those who are wise in their own eyes and clever in their own sight! Isaiah 5:20-21 Aware of our own need for God to define the evil of our own hearts, and keenly aware that God’s unveiling to us the reality of our sinful hearts impels us to come to His Son for cleansing, we are also compelled, for the sake of our nation, and the individuals in it who are calling homosexuality good when God calls it evil, to publicly reaffirm the Biblical stance on same sex marriage and homosexuality. **CONCERNING SAME SEX MARRIAGE** A reaffirmation of the Presbyterian Church in America’s position on Homosexuality adopted at the 5th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America, 1977, 5-49, 4, p. 67 and 8, p. 68 (http://www.pcahistory.org/pca/2-398.html) **POSITION ON HOMOSEXUALITY**

**Whereas**, God has plainly spoken of homosexuality in his Word, denouncing both the act, and the lust as sin, condemning this perversion as unnatural, a degrading passion, an indecent act, an error, an abomination and hence worthy of death ( _Lev. 18:22, Rom. 1:18-32_ ) for those who practice or approve of it ( _Romans 1: 32b_ ). you shall not lie with a male as one lies with a female; it is an abomination. Leviticus 18:22 For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who suppress the truth in unrighteousness, because that which is known about God is evident within them; for God made it evident to them. For since the creation of the world His invisible attributes, His eternal power and divine nature, have been clearly seen, being understood through what has been made, so that they are without excuse. For even though they knew God, they did not honor Him as God or give thanks, but they became futile in their speculations, and their foolish heart was darkened. . . . Therefore God gave them over in the lusts of their hearts to impurity, so that their bodies would be dishonored among them. For they exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever. Amen. For this reason God gave them over to degrading passions; for their women exchanged the natural function for that which is unnatural, and in the same way also the men abandoned the natural function of the woman and burned in their desire toward one another, men with men committing indecent acts and receiving in their own persons the due penalty of their error. And just as they did not see fit to acknowledge God any longer, God gave them over to a depraved mind, to do those things which are not proper, being filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, evil; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malice; _they are_ gossips, slanderers, haters of God, insolent, arrogant, boastful, inventors of evil, disobedient to parents, without understanding, untrustworthy, unloving, unmerciful; and although they know the ordinance of God, that those who practice such things are worthy of death, they not only do the same, but also give hearty approval to those who practice them. Romans 1:18-21, 24-32. And,

**Whereas**, we recognize, that God's righteous judgment is upon those who approve of such detestable acts, as well as those who practice them; and **Moreover**, whereas God has clearly stated that the condoning of homosexuality as well as murder, immorality, kidnapping, lying, perjury and all other unrighteousness is contrary to sound teaching ( _1 Timothy_ _1:10-11, 2 Peter 3:14-18_ ); **Therefore**,

**be it resolved** that the Forty-second General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America reaffirm the historical Biblical position as adopted by the Fifth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America, which states that: **1** . The act of homosexuality is a sin according to God's Word; **2** . Churches should actively seek to lead the homosexual person to confession and repentance that he might find justification and sanctification in Jesus Christ, according to I Corinthians 6:11; and **3** . In light of the Biblical view of its sinfulness, a practicing homosexual continuing in this sin would not be a fit candidate for ordination or membership in the Presbyterian Church in America.

**Be it further resolved** that the Forty-Second General Assembly encourage its Pastors, Elders, Deacons and members to recognize their responsibility to do all in their power to peacefully petition the civil magistrate, that such men and women who practice, approve, or condone homosexuality not be invested with the authority to teach in schools or to use the powers of their vocation to influence our citizens to approve of or practice homosexuality.

**Be it further resolved** that the Forty-second General Assembly, in the name of the One and Only True and Living God, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the ultimate King, Governor, and Judge of all nations, as revealed in the 66 Books of the Holy Scriptures consisting of the Old and New Testaments, call upon our local, state and Federal legislatures, governors, and the President of the United States to cease and desist from any legislation legalizing same sex marriage. This moral evil, that will further corrupt our society, may bring the temporal judgment of God Almighty both upon individuals and the nation now (see Romans 1:1-32 above), and will certainly bring God’s final judgment on individuals on Judgment Day. Now I desire to remind you, though you know all things once for all, that the Lord, after saving a people out of the land of Egypt, subsequently destroyed those who did not believe. And angels who did not keep their own domain, but abandoned their proper abode, He has kept in eternal bonds under darkness for the judgment of the great day, just as Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities around them, since they in the same way as these indulged in gross immorality and went after strange flesh, are exhibited as an example in undergoing the punishment of eternal fire. Jude 1:5-7 (see Genesis 19).

**Be it further resolved** that we, the Forty-second General Assembly, call upon all Christians as individuals, churches, conventions, fellowships, presbyteries, and denominations to stand with us formally and publicly in the adoption of this resolution.

**Be it further resolved** that our churches renew our commitment to proclaiming pardon to all who turn from their sin to the living God. Do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
