# GA42 O40 — Amend BCO 15-1 & 15-3 Regarding Presbytery Judicial Commission Decisions

**Assembly:** 42nd (2014)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 40 from TE Christian L. Keidel of (to CCB, OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Referred  ·  **BCO:** 15-1

*Source: [ga42_2014 p. 847](../markdown/ga42_2014.md#ga42-p847)*

---

Philadelphia Metro West Presbytery “Amend _BCO_ 15-1 and 15-3 Regarding Presbytery Judicial Commission Decisions” [Note: Submitted under _RAO_ 11-10]

**Whereas** the following rationale is given for the revisions [herein proposed] of _BCO_ 15-1 and 15-3: 1. it allows a judicial commission to be a true commission, whose decisions and actions represent the Presbytery. In establishing the current procedures of the SJC of GA, the Ad Interim Committee on Judicial Procedure (AICJP) said the following: _“A commission is not a_ _body separate from the Assembly, with delegated powers, acting on its_ _behalf. Rather, a commission is the Assembly itself, exercising its own_ _Christ-appointed powers, determining to act for particular purposes,_ _with a more limited number of commissioners.”_ ( _Report of AICJP to the_ _24_ _[th]_ _GA, June 1996, p. 56)_ 2. It provides a check against abuse in the case of commission decisions where 1/3 of the voting members of a judicial commission make a minority report. In such instance, Presbytery would hear and decide between a majority and minority position, or have a new commission determine the matter if they do not approve of either. _“In most cases the_ _SJC ought to function as a true commission, in the historic Presbyterian_ _sense of the term, concluding the business referred to it. Prudence, on_ _the other hand, as well as lessons learned from the experience of other_ _denominations, suggests that when the SJC itself is seriously divided, the_ _matter ought to be referred to the broader Assembly for final action. This_ _amendment provides for both”._ ( _Report of AICJP to the 24_ _[th]_ _GA, June_ _1996, p. 55)_ If our Presbytery adopts the basic procedure of _BCO_ 15, it will protect against abuse of power or authority by a judicial commission. 3. The current _BCO_ 15-3 says the decisions of a Presbytery judicial commission must be approved by Presbytery without debate in an up or down vote. This forces Presbyters to make a decision on cases they have not heard directly and almost always results in approval and can thus be seen as somewhat perfunctory. _“Further, we concluded that a_ _significant degree of the tension arising from our current procedure_ _resulted from the hybrid form of the SJC - a commission in name – but_ _subject to approval by the Assembly, an Assembly that has not heard and_ _cannot debate the case. It is our judgment that the PCA should return to_ _the historic usage of the PCUS, a procedure adopted not in its declining_ _days, but in a period of its health._ _Consider the testimony of 1. D. Leslie: "After studying closely fifty_ _judicial cases coming up to the General Assembly, from 1870 to 1909,_ _and having had all judicial cases since then go through my hands as_ _clerk, i do not find a single casein which the assembly opened for_ _discussion the judgment of a commission to which an appeal or_ _complaint was given. In every case, the judgment of the commission was_ _entered on the minutes as the judgment of the Assembly…” [1. D. Leslie,_ _Presbyterian Law and Procedure in the Presbyterian Church in the_ _United States. Richmond, VA: Presbyterian Committee of Publication,_ _1930, pp.119-20.] (Report of AICJP to the 24_ _[th]_ _GA, June 1996, pp. 49-50)_ 4. Since “the judgment shall be effective from the time of its announcement to the parties,” there does not have to be a long delay until the next stated meeting of Presbytery for the judicial decision to go into effect, especially over the summer months. Also, if the proposed [main] motion were to be adopted, parties would conceivably have to wait for closet oa year or half a year, before receiving approval of the GA for a GA SJC decision. This seems discouragingly long. **Be it therefore resolved** that _BCO_ 15-1 and 15-3 be amended as follows (strike through for deletions; underlining for new wording): **15-1.** A commission differs from an ordinary committee in that while a committee is appointed to examine, consider and report, a commission is authorized to deliberate upon and conclude the business referred to it. ~~, except in the case of~~ ~~judicial commissions of a Presbytery appointed under BCO~~ ~~15-3.~~ . . . **15-3.** a. presbytery as a whole may try a judicial case within its jurisdiction (including the right to refer any strictly constitutional issue to a study committee with options listed below), or it may of its own motion commit any judicial case to a commission. Such a commission shall be appointed by the Presbytery from its members other than members of the Session of the church from which the case comes up. The commission shall try the case in the manner presented by the Rules of Discipline and shall submit to the Presbytery a full statement of the case and the judgment rendered. ~~The~~ ~~Presbytery without debate shall approve or disapprove of the~~ ~~judgment, or may refer, (a debatable motion), any strictly~~ ~~constitutional issue(s) to a study committee.~~ The decision of the Presbytery Judicial Commission shall be the final decision of the Presbytery except as set forth below. Members of the Judicial Commission may file concurring or dissenting opinions, or a minority report as set forth in (c) below. The judgment of the Commission shall be effective from the time of its announcement to the parties. b. In case of referral, the Presbytery shall either dismiss some or all of the specific charges raised in the case or decide the case only after the report of the study committee has been heard and discussed. ~~If Presbytery~~ ~~approves, the judgment of the commission shall be final and~~ ~~shall be entered on the minutes of Presbytery as the action. If~~ ~~Presbytery disapproves, it shall hear the case as a whole, or~~ ~~appoint a new commission to hear the case again.”~~ c. (1) If, within twenty four (24) hours of the time of adjournment of a judicial commission meeting at which a final decision was rendered in a case, at least one third (1/3) of the voting members of the Judicial Commission file written notice of their intention to file a minority decision with the Stated Clerk of the Presbytery, and within twenty (20) days from the adjournment do file such a minority decision, such minority decision shall be considered a minority report and shall be referred, with the report of the Judicial Commission, to the Presbytery. (2) No such reference* from the Judicial Commission of a minority report shall be considered by the Presbytery unless the report of the Judicial Commission and the minority report have been mailed to the clerk of Session of each church at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting of the Presbytery. *NOTE: It was the opinion of the 26 [th] General Assembly that “reference” is not to be understood as the technical term “reference” in _BCO_ 41-1. (3) The Presbytery shall act upon such a reference* from the Judicial Commission, in each case without question, discussion, debate, or amendment, as follows: a) The Judicial Commission shall have 30 minutes to present its decision to the Presbytery. *NOTE: It was the opinion of the 26 th General Assembly that “reference” is NOT to be understood as the technical term “reference” in _BCO_ 41-1. b) The minority shall have 30 minutes to present its decision to the Presbytery. c) The Judicial Commission shall have 10 minutes to reply to the minority report. d) The decision of the minority shall be proposed and the Presbytery shall, without question, discussion, debate, or amendment approve or disapprove of the minority report. e) If the Presbytery disapproves the minority report, the Presbytery shall take up the decision of the Judicial Commission and without question, discussion, debate, or amendment, approve or disapprove of the decision of the Judicial Commission. (4) If the Presbytery approves of a proposed decision, it shall be the decision of the Presbytery, and printed in its minutes. If the Presbytery finally disapproves of both proposed decisions, it must set the case for hearing before the Presbytery or a special commission appointed by it, and in either instance the case shall be tried on the record as delivered to the Stated Clerk. Any such special commission shall then proceed to consider the case and shall report its decision, in like manner, to the Presbytery for its approval or disapproval. In any event, the full record of the case, including written testimony of witnesses, all documents, exhibits and papers shall be delivered to the Stated Clerk for preservation. _This Overture was originally introduced by me to the Philadelphia Metro_ _West Presbytery as a substitute overture to the General Assembly at its stated_ _meeting on January 18, 2014, and was defeated. It is submitted now to_ _General Assembly in accordance with RAO 11-10._

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
