# GA43 O9 — Establish Study Committee on Westminster Standards & the Sabbath

**Assembly:** 43rd (2015)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 9 from Tennessee Valley Presbytery (to AC, OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered by reference

*Source: [ga43_2015 p. 615](../markdown/ga43_2015.md#ga43-p615)*

---

“Establish Study Committee to Recommend Changes to the Westminster Standards regarding the Sabbath”

**Whereas** the grounds stated in Overture 7 to the 41st 5 General Assembly of the PCA by North Texas Presbytery are still of valid concern; and

**Whereas** the 41st General Assembly responded to Overture 7 in the negative with the following Grounds: “It would be better if Presbyteries that have concerns or questions with _WCF_ 21:8, _WLC_ 117 and 119 and _WSC_ 60 and 61 would adopt overtures proposing specific changes to the Westminster documents so that the General Assembly can be clear as to the scope of the issues and whether a study committee is necessary.” ( _M41GA_, p. 66) In submission to the direction and counsel of the 41st General Assembly; and

**Whereas** a growing number of teaching elder candidates have taken and have had approved stated differences to these portions of the Westminster Standards; and

**Whereas** this reality, at least, causes the appearance of conflict between what we officially confess and what we actually believe and practice; and

**Whereas** we understand the resolution of this situation will take considerable study, work, and debate;

**Therefore be it resolved** that the Tennessee Valley Presbytery overtures the Forty-Third General Assembly of the PCA to erect a study committee, as requested in Overture 7 to the 41st General Assembly, to consider changes to the portions of the Westminster Standards [ _WCF_ 21-8; _WLC_ Q&As 117, 119; _WSC_ Q&As 60, 61] referred to in the “Grounds” for the 41st Assembly’s response, above. The budget for such study committee is not to exceed $5,000 funded by designated contributions. **Possible language for study committee to consider** [Strike-through for deletions; underlining for new wording]: _WCF_ 21-8. This Sabbath is then kept holy unto the Lord, when men, after a due preparing of their hearts, and ordering of their common affairs beforehand, do not only observe an holy rest, all the day, from their own works, words, and thoughts about their worldly employments ~~and recreations,~~ but also are taken up ~~, the whole time,~~ in the public and private exercises of his worship, and in the duties of necessity and mercy. _WLC Q. 117. How is the Sabbath or the Lord’s Day to be sanctified?_ A. The Sabbath or Lord’s Day is to be sanctified by an holy resting all the day, not only from such works as are at all times sinful, but even from such worldly employments ~~and recreations~~ as are on other days lawful; and making it our delight to spend ~~the whole~~ time ~~(except so~~ ~~much of it a sis to betaken up in works of necessity and mercy)i~~ n the public and private exercises of God’s worship: and, to that end, we are to prepare our hearts, and with such foresight, diligence, and moderation, to dispose and seasonably dispatch our worldly business, that we may be the more free and fit for the duties of that day, including focusing on public and private worship as well as works of necessity and mercy. _WLC Q. 119. What are the sins forbidden in the fourth commandment?_ A. The sins forbidden in the fourth commandment are all omissions of the duties required, all careless, negligent, and unprofitable performing of them, and being weary of them; all profaning the day by idleness, and doing that which is in itself sinful; and by all needless works, words, and thoughts, about our worldly employments ~~and recreations~~ . _WSC Q. 60. How is the Sabbath to be sanctified?_ A. The Sabbath is to be sanctified by a holy resting all that day, even from such worldly employments ~~and recreations~~ as are lawful on other days; and spending ~~the whole~~ time in the public and private exercises of God’s worship ~~, except so much a sis to betaken up in the~~ ~~works of necessity and mercy~~ as well as engaging in works of necessity and mercy. _WSC Q. 61. What is forbidden in the fourth commandment?_ A. The fourth commandment forbiddeth the omission, or careless performance, of the duties required, and the profaning the day by idleness, or doing that which is in itself sinful, or by unnecessary thoughts, words, or works, about our worldly employments ~~or~~ ~~recreations.~~ **GROUNDS:** It is common in exams in TVP for candidates to take exception to _WCF_ chapter 21, section 8 and _LC_ questions 117 and 119 and _SC_ questions 60 and 61. TVP routinely approves these exceptions regarding recreation on the Sabbath without discussion. In fact, taking exception to the Standards’ prohibition of recreation on the Sabbath seems to have become the default position of the PCA. With this reality it seems to us that it is time to consider amending the Standards regarding recreation on the Sabbath. We recognize that this is not a process to be entered into without careful thought and most importantly without clear Scriptural guidance. But it is our belief that it is Scripture itself that needs to be heard. Objecting to recreation on the Sabbath cannot come from merely not liking the prohibition. We recognize that often we must do what we might naturally desire not to do because of our faithfulness to God’s Word. At times we must be willing to stand against our culture because of our commitment to Scripture as God’s rule of faith and life. Is the prohibition of recreation on the Sabbath to be included in this resistance to the prevailing winds that characterize our culture? We are not convinced that it is. And we base this on what we believe Scripture commands. At the same time we wish to be clear that our proposal is not intended to lessen our appreciation of the Confession and Catechisms but is rather a call for _greater confessional_ _integrity_ . This short paper will seek to address two critical questions: Is the prohibition of recreation on the Sabbath expressly set down in Scripture? Is recreation forbidden on the Sabbath by good and necessary consequence from Scripture? One will recognize that this is the framework given by the _WCF_ for understanding “the whole counsel of God” ( _WCF_ chapter 1, section 6: The whole counsel of God, concerning all things necessary for his own glory, man’s salvation, faith, and life, is either expressly set down in Scripture, or by good and necessary consequence may be deduced from Scripture: unto which nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new revelations of the Spirit, or traditions of men. Nevertheless we acknowledge the inward illumination of the Spirit of God to be necessary for the saving understanding of such things as are revealed in the Word; and that there are some circumstances concerning the worship of God, and government of the Church, common to human actions and societies, which are to be ordered by the light of nature and Christian prudence, according to the general rules of the Word, which are always to be observed. It is our belief that the case for or against recreation on the Sabbath must be made from Scripture. For that reason we do not enter into the historical situation that gave rise to the Assembly dealing with this specific matter. We are aware of the historical context of the Westminster Assembly and the positive influence of Nicolas Bownd’s 1595 treatise on the Sabbath and the negative influence of King James’ Book of Sports issued in 1617 and1633. However informative this history may be in demonstrating the cultural influences on the Westminster Assembly, the final appeal must be to God’s Word, which the Assembly believed they were interpreting correctly. While considering whether Scripture forbids recreation on the Sabbath, it is necessary to remember the positive nature of the fourth commandment. In Mt. 22.36-40 Christ summarized the first table of the Law with the words, “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind” (see also _LC_ question 102). As we approach the fourth commandment, we are being given instruction as to how we are to demonstrate our love to God as we keep the Sabbath. First – is recreation on the Sabbath forbidden by divine command? The Sabbath command in Ex. 20.8-11 and Dt. 5.12-15 begins with the instruction to remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. This opening sentence gives the general instruction that God’s people are to celebrate and call to memory the seventh day that it may be separated and set apart to God. A major difference in the Sabbath day from the other six days is the restriction on work on the Sabbath. In the use of _ʿābad_ (to labor) and _mĕlāʾka_ (occupation, work), the commandment has in view what the Confession phrases as worldly employments. _ʿābad_ is the term used in Gen. 2.5, 15; 3.23; 4.2, 12 to speak of tilling the ground and in Ex. 5.18 to do the work of making bricks. These examples are consistent with the use of _ʿābad_ throughout the Old Testament, and it is plain that the word is limited to work in the sense of physical labor. The use of _mĕlāʾka_ falls into the same category as can be seen from its use in passages such as Gen. 2.2; Jer. 18.3; and Jonah 1.8. Based on the terms used in the fourth commandment, it is labor, not activities in general, that is prohibited on the Sabbath. But what about Isaiah 58.13, which the Standards use as a proof text to forbid recreation: “If you turn back your foot from the Sabbath, from doing your pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight and the holy day of the Lord honorable; if you honor it, not going your own ways, or seeking your own pleasure or talking idly” (ESV)? Does this not clearly forbid any form of recreation on the Sabbath? The context of the chapter is God’s critique of formalism in Israel’s worship with specific focus on fasting and Sabbath keeping. Both fasting and Sabbath are to be a “delight” or “pleasure” (the Hebrew reading, _ḥēpeṣ_ ) _._ It must be emphasized that _ḥēpeṣ_ is not referring to fun and games but to the things that we take pleasure in or are a delight to us. We see this usage in passages such as Is. 54.12 (“walls of precious stone _”_ ); Mal. 3.12 (“all the nations will call you blessed for you will be al and of delight _”_ ); Job 31.12 (“if I have withheld anything that the poor desired _”_ ); Is. 44.28 (“I am the Lord Who says of Cyrus, he is my shepherd and he shall fulfill all my purpose _”_ ); Is. 53.10 (“the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand _”_ ); Prov. 31.13 (“ _she seeks wool and flax and works with_ _willing hands”_ ); Eccl. 3.17 (“ _I”_ ); Is. 58.3 (“behold, in the day of your fast you seek your own pleasure, and oppress all your workers _”_ ). It is apparent from the wide range of usage that the meaning of _ḥēpeṣ_ cannot be limited to recreation and there is good reason to question whether this is the correct understanding of the term in Is. 58.13. This is particularly true in light of its use in Is. 58.3, which points to a meaning associated with work, not recreation. Given the semantic range of _ḥēpeṣ_, its usage in passages such as Prov. 31.13, Eccl. 3.17, and its context in Is. 58, it is likely that the idea of “pursuing one’s business” would make more sense in Is. 58.13. In summary, from the words used in the Sabbath command and in Is. 58, we are not convinced that recreation is forbidden by divine command. Second - Is recreation on the Sabbath forbidden by good and necessary consequence? Is. 58.13 states that God will bless those who turn back from doing their pleasure, their delight, their will on the Sabbath. Obviously that does not include the pleasure of worship and serving God. It does at least mean that the Sabbath is not a day to do with as we please. Does that preclude recreation? To consider this question it is helpful to think about the purpose of the Sabbath as a gift of God – a sign of His goodness. Jesus taught in Mk. 2.27 that the Sabbath is for our benefit and as such is a sign of God’s grace. The reaction of the Pharisees here is quite instructive. They “watched Jesus, to see whether He would heal him [a man with a …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
