# GA44 O24 — Form Columbus Metropolitan Presbytery

**Assembly:** 44th (2016)  ·  **Source:** Ohio Presbytery to “Form Columbus Metropolitan  ·  **Disposition:** Adopted (final)

*Source: [ga44_2016 p. 247](../markdown/ga44_2016.md#ga44-p247)*

---

Presbytery,” be answered in the affirmative. See **Attachment 6.** 8. That **Overture 44** to the 44th General Assembly, “Creation of PCA Unity Fund,” **be answered in the affirmative with the following** **amendments** : That the underlined words be inserted at the end of this paragraph:

**Therefore be it resolved,** that the 44 [th] General Assembly create a fund to be known as “The PCA Unity Fund” to help raise up future generations of godly, reformed African American and other minority Ruling and Teaching Elders that would include the following objectives, based on the availability of designated funds given to the Unity Fund: That the following paragraph be amended as follows: a) Establishing a board that reports to MNA and is comprised of ~~African American and other minority~~ ~~teaching and ruling elders of the PCA~~ 6 Teaching Elders and 6 Ruling Elders, of whom at least 8 are African American or other minorities. And further, that the Permanent Committee on Mission to North America be directed to proceed with implementation of both sets of items a) through d) of the Overture, reporting that implementation to the General Assembly in future years through the customary Permanent Committee and Committee of Commissioners procedures. (Attachment 7) 9. That **Overture 61** from Illiana Presbytery, in concurrence with the expressed desire of Presbytery of Northern Illinois, “Restructure Boundary of Iliana Presbytery,” by transferring Sangamon County to Presbytery of Northern Illinois, **be answered in the affirmative.** (Attachment 8) 10. That **Overture 62** from Presbytery of Northern Illinois, “Restructure Boundary of Presbytery of Northern Illinois,” by transferring Sangamon County to Presbytery of Northern Illinois, with the concurrence of Illiana presbytery, **be answered in the affirmative.** (Attachment 9) **ATTACHMENT 1** **2015 CHURCH PLANTERS PLACED ON THE FIELD** This church planter list is compiled by MNA staff through contact with the presbyteries and attempts to identify every church planter placed on the field to begin a new work during 2015. In listing these mission churches, MNA does not intend to imply that MNA had direct involvement with each and every mission church. The majority of the listed mission churches utilized MNA services; others were established solely by presbyteries or sponsoring churches. teaching elders assigned to anew site of a multi-congregation church are included in this list as church planters placed on the field. Some church planters listed here may have been placed in previous years but not reported at the time. **Presbytery** **Last Name** **First Name Location** Blue Ridge Sharrett Mike Lynchburg VA Chicago Metro Vroom Paul Lockport IL *Received from RCA Covenant Anderson Dan Little Rock AR Eastern Canada Dunk Paul Kitchener/Waterloo, Ontario CAN Eastern Canada Vanden Brink Paul Hamilton/Dundas, Ontario CAN Eastern Carolina Davis Duane Raleigh NC Eastern Carolina Schubert Jason Elizabeth City NC Evangel Goodman Matthew Irondale/Birmingham AL Evangel Shelton Wayne Gardendale AL Georgia Foothills Bennett Bill Jefferson GA Georgia Foothills Dunn Dwight Grayson GA Eutsey Kevin Georgia Foothills Floyd Stuart Braselton GA Georgia Foothills Thomas Kellet Buford GA Bull Scott Georgia Foothills Werner Clay Athens GA Houston Metro Schuster Leo Houston TX Korean SE Seo Peter Montgomery AL Korean SW Yoon Sung Eun Frisco TX Metro Atlanta Iverson Dan Atlanta/Grove Park GA Metro Atlanta Oaks Brian Roswell GA Nashville Bradley Matthew Brentwood, TN Nashville Kamau Robert Nashville TN Nashville Kroft Stacy Vanderbilt TN Nashville *Stewart Scott E Nashville TN North Florida Clotaire Raymond Jacksonville FL North Texas Bermudez Raul Tulsa OK North Texas Davis Brian Fort Worth TX North Texas Wheeler Ben Tyler TX Ohio Valley Wilmhauf Marshall Lexington KY Pacific Lien Tim S. Pasadena CA Pacific Myers Dan N Hollywood/Los Angeles Pacific Suh Michael Los Angeles CA Pacific Northwest Allen Andrew Soldotna AK Pacific Northwest Bruner David West Seattle WA Palmetto Figgins Kevin Columbia SC Phila Metro W Stern Will Chad’s Ford PA Potomac Chinnavan Jegar Centreville VA Potomac May Paul Ashburn VA Potomac Wikner Ben Rockville MD Rocky Mountain Scott Aaron Whitefish MT Savannah River Davis Jason Vidalia GA South Coast Novak Rob Hillcrest/San Diego CA South Coast Sandoval Chris South Park/San Diego CA South Coast Hales Bryce Ladera Ranch CA South Texas Simmons Jay Austin TX SE Alabama Beauchamp Tim US Military Base Guam SE Alabama Orlando John US Military Base Vicenza ITALY SE Louisiana Kines Josh Lafayette LA S. New England Fisher Joe Suffield CT S. New England Holbrooke Andrew Fairfield CT Southwest Schneeberger Greg Phoenix AZ Southwest Viramontes Adam Albuquerque NM SW Florida Woodall Justin Tampa FL *Second Site **2015 Church Planting Apprentices** **Presbytery** **Last Name** **First Name Location** Central Florida Harris Ben Palm Bay FL Gulfstream Perry Ronnie W Palm Beach FL Heritage Schmidtberger Robbie Kennett Square PA Metro Atlanta Smith Allen Atlanta GA Metro Atlanta Yang Daniel Atlanta GA Nashville Hager Jonathan Nashville TN Ohio Robertson Mark Medina OH Philadelphia Kim Jacob Philadelphia PA Providence Hatfield Harrison Madison AL Rocky Mountain Arkema Ryan Parker CO S. New England Rome Erik West Roxbury MA S New England Yang Steve Jamaica Plain MA SW Florida Kemp Jeremy Lakeland FL **2015 MNA/Covenant Theological Church Planter Interns** **Interns** **Mentors** **Church** **Location** Joe Dewey Mark Tucker Midtown Ch St. Louis MO Josh Henderson Bob Sawyer Christ the King Ch Boston MA RJ March Tim Udouj Redeemer Presby Greenville SC John St. Martin Bart Moseman CityLife Church Minneapolis MN **ATTACHMENT 2** **MNA CHAPLAIN MINISTRIES REPORT ON 2015 ACTIVITIES** **THANKSGIVING AND PRAISE:** We are extremely grateful for the generosity of God’s people; our 2015 operating expenses were covered with gifts from individuals, churches, presbyteries, and PRCC denominations. As of December 31, 2015, the PCA had 206 civilian, military chaplains, and military chaplain candidates (284 for all PRCC denominations). The PCA is privileged to endorse military and civilian chaplains in a variety of settings including those of the additional 6 denominations in the Presbyterian and Reformed Commission (PRCC): Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church (ARPC), Korean American Presbyterian Church (KAPC), Korean Presbyterian Church in America (KPCA), Orthodox Presbyterian Church (OPC), The Reformed Presbyterian Church in North American (RPCNA), and United Reformed Churches of North America (RPCNA). As the MNA Chaplain Ministries Director, I also serve as the Endorser for aforementioned Reformed denominations. In total, the PRCC endorses and supports about 283 military and civilian chaplains and chaplain candidates. **2015 HIGHLIGHTS** : Growing Civilian Chaplain Population: i am delighted to work with anew Associate Coordinator, TE Del Farris (Associate Coordinator, Civilian Chaplaincy). Del has a vision for an expanded role of Presbyterian and Reformed TEs serving in the civilian chaplain environment. He revised some PRCC policies and added several names to our roster that either required or requested a PRCC endorsement. Chaplain Recruitment: Our goal is to recruit an additional 20 chaplains and chaplain candidates during the year 2016. We thank the Lord that 37 additional men came “on board” in 2015 – most were PCA. PRCC Staff: As always, it is a professional and personal satisfaction to serve with four other godly PCA men who work hard to support our chaplains: RE Gary Hitzfeld, TEs Del Farris, Mack Griffith, and David Tubley. They are exceptional men who make significant contributions to support this vibrant chaplain ministry! **CHURCH AND PRESBYTERY SUPPORT PROGRAMS** : Congregation Sponsorship: It is our goal to enlist three sponsoring congregations for every full-time military and civilian chaplain. The primary purpose of the sponsorship program is to enlist prayer support for the chaplain, his ministry, and his family. The sponsoring chaplain, in turn, will provide at least three update reports per year with prayer requests to the congregation/presbytery. Church/Presbytery Financial Support: To honor giving churches, a special Purple Star Certificate has been created to thank them for their sacrifice. In these challenging financial times, Chaplain Ministries is especially thankful for this kind of support; providing for MNA Staff to care for our current chaplains and to recruit more. Missions Conferences: Since the Chaplaincy is all about the Great Commission, we enjoy such invitations. An increasing number of congregations during the past year have included chaplains in their respective mission’s conferences. Contact us and we will locate a chaplain to speak to your various church groups and/or worship services about MNA Chaplain Ministries. Email us at: ChaplainMinistries@pcanet.org. **PLEASE JOIN IN PRAYER FOR THESE CURRENT CHALLENGES:** Our chaplains have the First Amendment liberty to boldly represent our faith. No one can tell them how to pray, preach, counsel, or carry out their ecclesiastical duties. Our men are superb at walking through the pluralistic minefields inherent in the Chaplaincies. However, prayer is urgently needed for these requests, which are on our “ministry table” every day: - i am retiring in oct 2017. Please pray for the search committee as they seek my replacement. - Religious liberties are being challenged in the military due to recent legal and cultural changes. We are partnering with like-minded evangelicals to help those whose liberties may be challenged in the future. The Good News is that our chaplains can still serve with religious liberty as they preach, teach, counsel, marry, bury, and advise leadership. - We can expect the “world, the flesh and the devil” to tempt and challenge our chaplains to be quiet and fearful when it comes to bold Gospel proclamation. - In order to serve this growing ministry, we need to increase our budget to $500,000. This will enable us to stay on the road providing “Care and Cover” to these terrific families. For more information on ministry opportunities with MNA Chaplain Ministries, please contact Gary Hitzfeld at ChaplainMinistries@pcanet.org or 678-825-1251. _/s/ Douglas E. Lee_ Chaplain (BG) USA (Ret) Executive Director, Presbyterian & Reformed Commission on Chaplains and Military Personnel (PRCC) www.prcc.co / 678-701-5151 / F: 877-727-2290 _No provision in our Constitution ought to be dearer to man than that which_ _protects the rights of conscience against the enterprises of the civil authority_ _. . . i trust that the whole course of my life has proved me a sincere friend to_ _religious as well as civil liberty._ Thomas Jefferson-1809 **ATTACHMENT 3** **MNA STAFF MEMBERS** RE Glynn Barnes MNA SecondCareer RV Specialist, Southeast Ruth Anne Batstone Parakaleo Church Planting Spouses Ministry Gospel Life Consultant TE Casey Bedell Ministry to State Associate Director to DC Ministries TE Jim Bland Coordinator RE Alan Bonderud Metanoia Prison Ministries Associate Director Nancy Booher English as a Second Language (ESL) Ministries Director TE Stephen Bostrom Ministry to State, State Minister- Montana TE John Browne MNA Disaster Response Specialist, Sheds of Hope Cristina Caires Parakaleo Church Planting Spouses Ministry Network Development Director RE Mark Casson Metanoia Prison Ministries Director Jamie Devins Parakaleo Church Planting Spouses Ministry Operations Manager TE Thomas Eddy Ministry to State, Associate Director of State Capitals DE Andy Eisenbraun MNA Disaster Response Specialist, Midwest Region TE Bruce Farrant Native American and First Nations Ministries Coordinator TE Del Farris Chaplain Ministries, Associate Director Civilian Chaplaincy TE Alan Foster Church Planter Recruiting Director TE Chuck Garriott Ministry to State Director Maria Garriott Parakaleo Church Planting …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
