# GA45 O22 — Form New Presbytery from North Texas and Covenant

**Assembly:** 45th (2017)  ·  **Source:** North Texas, “Form a New Presbytery from  ·  **Disposition:** Adopted (final)

*Source: [ga45_2017 p. 62](../markdown/ga45_2017.md#ga45-p62)*

---

**North Texas and Covenant,”** [in concurrence with the expressed desire of North Texas Presbytery] (see p. 676) be answered in the affirmative, effective July 1, 2017. _Adopted_ 11. That the General Assembly **approve** the minutes of the MNA Permanent Committee Called meeting dated 2016 May 26; _Adopted_ 12. That the General Assembly **approve** the minutes of the MNA Permanent Committee Regular meetings dated 2016 September 13 14, and 2017 March 1 – 2. _Adopted_ **IV. Commissioners Present:** **Presbytery Commissioner** Blue Ridge TE Robert Smith Calvary TE Richard Thomas Catawba Valley RE Dennis Drennen Central Carolina RE Jim Sutton Central Georgia TE Gary Leibovich Central Indiana TE Pat Hickman Chesapeake TE Brian LoPiccolo Covenant TE Kevin Hale Eastern Carolina TE Grant Beachy Eastern Canada TE William Radford Evangel TE Murray Lee Fellowship TE Richard Wheeler Georgia Foothills TE Jared Bryant Great Lakes TE Ryan McVicar Gulf Coast TE Michael Brock Gulfstream RE Ron Tobias Houston Metro TE Dennis Hermerding James River RE Jim Rudkin Korean Capital TE Mark Oh Low Country TE Phil Stogner Metro Atlanta RE Dan Case Metropolitan New York RE Kevin Heaphy Missouri TE Loren Bell Mississippi Valley TE Ralph Kelley Nashville TE F. Len Hendrix New Jersey TE Peter Eck New River TE James Pavlic New York State TE Marc Swan North Texas TE Jeremy Fair Northern Illinois RE Fred Winterroth Philadelphia TE Chuck Angert Philadelphia Metro West TE Robbie Schmidtberger Piedmont Triad TE Clyde Godwin Pittsburgh TE David Schweissing Potomac TE Scott Bridges Providence TE Wilson Shirley Savannah River TE John Barrett Southeast Alabama TE David Temples Southern Louisiana RE Aaron Collier Southern New England TE Logan Keck Susquehanna Valley TE Clifford Morton Tennessee Valley TE John Blevins Western Canada TE Bradley Jones Westminster RE Theo Hagg Respectfully submitted, /s/ TE Scott Bridges, Chairman /s/ TE Jeremy Fair, Secretary **45-46 Covenant Theological Seminary Informational and Committee of** **Commissioners Reports** TE Andrew Vander Maas, CoC Chairman led the Assembly in prayer, and yielded to TE Mark L. Dalbey, President of the Seminary, who presented the Informational Report of the work of the Seminary. (For the full report of CTS, see Appendix F, p. 206.) The CoC Chairman presented the CoC report (below). **Recom-** **mendations 1-9** were **adopted** . **Recommendation 10,** addressing the budget, was **deferred** to CoC on Administration. The Chairman closed the report with prayer. **REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF COMMISSIONERS ON** **COVENANT THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY** **I. Business Referred to the Committee** A. CTS Permanent Committee Report B. CTS Stated Board Meeting Minutes from: April 29–30, 2016; September 23–24, 2016; January 27, 2017 C. CTS Executive Committee Minutes Stated Meetings: December 2, 2016; March 10, 2017 Called Meetings: April 29, 2016; September 23, 2016; January 17, 2017; January 26, 2017 D. CTS 2017-2018 Proposed Budget E. 2016 CTS Audit F. CTS Permanent Committee Recommendations **II. Statement of Major Issues Discussed** A. CTS Permanent Committee Report B. CTS Stated Board Meeting Minutes from: April 29–30, 2016; September 23–24, 2016; January 27, 2017 C. CTS Executive Committee Minutes Stated Meetings: December 2, 2016; March 10, 2017 Called Meetings: April 29, 2016; September 23, 2016; January 17, 2017; January 26, 2017 D. CTS 2017-2018 Proposed Budget E. 2016 CTS Audit F. CTS Permanent Committee Recommendations **III. Recommendations** 1. That the General Assembly give thanks to God for the ministry of Covenant Theological Seminary; for its faithfulness to the Scriptures, the Reformed faith, and the Great Commission; for its students, graduates, faculty, staff, and trustees; and for those who support the Seminary through their prayers and gifts. _Adopted_ 2. That the General Assembly encourage the congregations of the Presbyterian Church in America to support the ministry of Covenant Theological Seminary by contributing the Partnership Shares approved by the Assembly, and by recommending Covenant Seminary to prospective students. _Adopted_ 3. That the General Assembly ask the Lord to bless Covenant Seminary’s President, Dr. Mark Dalbey, and grant him and the Seminary’s leadership team, faculty, and Board of Trustees great wisdom and clear vision as they seek to lead the institution into a new era of ministerial fruitfulness. _Adopted_ 4. That the General Assembly ask God to guide Covenant Seminary’s ongoing efforts at recruiting new students, evaluating and strengthening our programs, and seeking to make the Seminary a greater resource for the church both locally and globally. _Adopted_ 5. That the General Assembly ask God’s blessing on the Seminary’s planning and fundraising efforts, and on its attempts to recruit a new generation of dedicated pastor-scholars to train new generations of leaders for Christ’s church and Kingdom. _Adopted_ 6. That the General Assembly pray for the further development of Covenant Seminary Nashville, our partnership with the Missional Training Center—Phoenix, and other strategic partnerships, that these might be a blessing to those seeking theological training for ministry or simply to enhance their faith, and that the Lord would use such partnerships to build his church. _Adopted_ 7. That the General Assembly pray for unity among the brethren of the PCA and ask the Lord to work in all our hearts to foster a deeper desire to engage with one another and the world in compassionate and gospel-centered ways, and that we might bear strong witness to the truth and power of God’s redeeming grace. _Adopted_ 8. That the General Assembly approve the minutes of the stated and called meetings of the Seminary’s Board of Trustees and Executive Committee of the Board of Trustees for the year as follows: _Adopted_ a. Without Exception. _Board of Trustees_ : April 29-30, 2016; September 23 24, 2016; January 27, 2017. _Stated Meetings of the_ _EC_ : March 10, 2017. _Called Meetings of the EC_ : April 29, 2016; September 23, 2016; January 17, 2017; January 26, 2017. b. Exceptions of Form. _Stated Meeting of the EC_ : December 2, 2016. 9. That the financial audit for Covenant Theological Seminary for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2016, by Capin Crouse LLC, be received. _Adopted_ 10. That the proposed 2017–18 budget of Covenant Theological Seminary be approved. _Deferred to CoC on AC_ **IV. Commissioners Present:** **Presbytery** **Commissioner** Blue Ridge TE Tag Tuck Calvary TE Carl Robbins Central Carolina TE Mark E. Upton Central Georgia TE George Andrew Adams Chesapeake TE John Arch Van Devender Eastern Carolina TE Todd Gwennap Evangel TE G. Mark Cushman Fellowship TE H. Wallace Tinsley Jr. Georgia Foothills TE Daniel Henderson Great Lakes TE Andrew Vander Maas Gulf Coast TE William H. Tyson Heritage TE Jonathan Adam Shields Houston Metro TE Taylor Leachman James River RE Robert Rumbaugh Korean Central TE Luke Kyungmoon Kim Lowcountry TE Ron Steel Metro Atlanta TE Walter H. Henegar Mississippi Valley TE Roger G. Collins Missouri TE Sam Haist Northern Illinois RE Christian Paulsen Philadelphia TE Maranatha Chung Pittsburgh TE LeRoy Capper Potomac TE Jerry C. Mead Siouxlands TE Jason Edward Dalton Southeast Alabama TE Matthew Jay DeLong Southern New England TE Jarrett Allebach Tidewater RE Albert Lee Western Carolina TE Michael E. Thompson Respectfully submitted, /s/ TE Andrew Vander Maas, Chairman /s/ TE Todd Gwennap, Secretary **45-47 Covenant College Informational and Committee of Commissioners** **Reports** RE Robert Jackson Wilson, CoC Chairman, led the Assembly in prayer, and yielded to RE J. Derek Halvorson, President of the College, who presented the Informational Report of the College which included a video. (For the full report of the Covenant College, see Appendix E, p. 202.) Chairman Wilson led the Assembly in prayer and presented the CoC report. **Recommendations 1-2, 4-7** were **adopted** . **Recommendation 3,** addressing the budget, was **deferred** to CoC on Administrative Committee. The Chairman closed the report with prayer. **REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF COMMISSIONERS ON** **COVENANT COLLEGE** **I. Business Referred to the Committee** A. CC Permanent Committee Report B. CC Board of Trustees Minutes from: October 13-14, 2016 March 16-17, 2017 C. CC Executive Committee of the Board of Trustees Minutes from: September 15, 2016 February 23, 2017 D. CC 2016 Audit E. CC 2017-2018 Proposed Budget F. CC Permanent Committee Recommendations **II. Statement of Major Issues Discussed** A. CC Permanent Committee Report B. CC Board of Trustees Minutes from: October 13-14, 2016 (approved with exception of form) March 16-17, 2017 (approved with exception of form) C. CC Executive Committee of the Board of Trustees Minutes from: September 15, 2016 (approved without exception) February 23, 2017 (approved with exception of form) D. CC 2016 Audit E. CC 2017-2018 Proposed Budget F. CC Permanent Committee Recommendations **III. Recommendations** 1. That the General Assembly thank and praise God for the excellent work and faithfulness of the Board of Trustees, faculty, and staff of Covenant College in serving the Presbyterian Church in America by shaping students for lives of service in the Kingdom of God. _Adopted_ 2. That the General Assembly encourage congregations of the PCA to support the ministry of Covenant College through encouraging prospective students to attend, through contributing the Partnership Shares approved by the General Assembly, and through prayer. _Adopted_ 3. That the General Assembly approve the budget for 2017-2018, as submitted through the Administrative Committee. _Deferred to the CoC on AC_ 4. That the General Assembly adopt “The Covenant College and Supporting Foundation Consolidated Financial Statements” dated June 30, 2016, and prepared by Capin Crouse LLP. _Adopted_ 5. That the General Assembly approve the minutes of the meetings of the Board of Trustees for October 13-14, 2016 (with exception of form), and March 16-17, 2017 (with exception of form), and the minutes of the meetings of the Executive Committee of the Board of Trustees for September 15, 2016 (without exception), and February 23, 2017 (with exception of form), with notations. _Adopted_ 6. That the General Assembly receive as information the foregoing Annual Report, recognizing God’s gracious and abundant blessing and commending the College in its desire to continue pursuing excellence in higher education for the glory of God. _Adopted_ 7. That the General Assembly designate a Sunday in the coming year on which churches of the denomination are encouraged to highlight the ministry of Covenant College and to pray specifically for the College in its mission and ministry. _Adopted_ **IV. Commissioners Present:** **Presbytery** **Commissioner** Ascension TE David O’Leary Blue Ridge TE John Pennylegion Calvary RE Derek Scott Catawba Valley TE Stephen O. Stout Central Carolina TE Andrew J. Webb Chesapeake TE Jason Van Bemmel Covenant TE Todd Matocha Eastern Carolina RE Daniel Prins Evangel TE Daniel Cohee Fellowship RE Wolfgang Roth Georgia Foothills RE Robert Jackson Wilson Grace TE Jim Plunk Great Lakes RE Allan Knapp Heartland TE Tim Rackley Houston Metro RE Robert Stacey Illiana TE Scott P. Moreland Metro Atlanta TE Dale Zarlenga Metropolitan New York TE Stephen P. Lewis Mississippi Valley RE David Elkin Missouri RE Bill McGreevy Nashville TE David O. Filson New River TE Alexander Ford New York State TE Mark J. Dunn North Texas TE Matthew David Fray Northern Illinois TE Steve Jones Northern New England TE Ian G. Hard Northwest Georgia TE Robert W. Burns Ohio Valley RE Floyd Johnson Piedmont Triad RE Robert Spaugh Pittsburgh RE Timothy Baird Potomac RE Adam Drews Providence RE Jonathan Haynes Savannah River TE Alexander Brown Southwest Florida TE Justin Conner Woodall Susquehanna Valley TE Lawrence C. Roff Tennessee Valley RE Don Kent Tidewater TE …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
