# GA46 O13 — Amend BCO 14-1.11 and Corporate Bylaws to Allow Women to Serve on Agency Boards

**Assembly:** 46th (2018)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 13 from Nashville Presbytery (to CCB, OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered in the negative  ·  **BCO:** 25-11

*Source: [ga46_2018 p. 693](../markdown/ga46_2018.md#ga46-p693)*

---

Revise _BCO_ 14-1.11 and the Corporate Bylaws of the PCA Article VI.1, - 4; VI.2, ¶1; VI.3, ¶1, ¶2; VI-4, ¶1, ¶2; and VI-5, ¶3 to Allow Women to Serve on Boards of Agencies”

**Whereas**, the 45 [th] General Assembly adopted recommendation 3 of the Report of the Ad Interim Committee on Women Serving in the Ministry of the Church, which calls for “sessions, presbyteries and the General Assembly to strive to develop, recognize, and utilize the gifts, skills, knowledge, and wisdom of godly women in the local, regional, and national church;” and

**Whereas**, that same recommendation called for the consideration of overtures “that would allow qualified women to serve on appropriate committees and agencies within the church;” and

**Whereas**, service on the Boards of Agencies established by the Corporate Bylaws of the Presbyterian Church in America is among the appropriate places for godly women to exercise their gifts in the national church; and

**Whereas**, with such changes provision should be made to maintain proper representation of church officers on the Boards of those Agencies; **Therefore**, Nashville Presbytery overtures the 46 [th] General Assembly to amend the Corporate Bylaws of the Presbyterian Church in America as follows ( ~~strike-through~~ for deletions, underlining for new wording): **Article VI.1**, fourth paragraph The Board of Directors of RBI shall be twelve (12) in number, divided into four (4) classes of three (3) ~~men~~ members each serving for four-(4-)year terms. Directors will be eligible for reelection to a second four-year term after which there must be a one-year interval before further re-election. The Board may make requests to the Presbyteries to nominate specific ~~men~~ members to the Board and may submit to the General Assembly Nominating Committee letters of recommendation concerning particular nominees from the Presbyteries. The General Assembly shall elect at each Assembly a class of Directors to begin service immediately following the conclusion of the Assembly. Each member of the Directors must be a member in good standing in a church or Presbytery in the Presbyterian Church in America. Two-thirds (8) of the Directors must be either a Teaching Elder, Ruling Elder, or Deacon in the Presbyterian Church in America. Directors who have not been ordained to one of those offices must affirm the questions proposed to Ruling Elders or Deacons at the time of their ordination and installation ( _BCO_ 24-6) with the exception that in the fourth question, the phrase “the office of ruling elder (or deacon, as the case may be) in this church” be replaced with “the position of Director of RBI,” and the phrase “of which God has made you an officer” at the end of that question be deleted. The Directors are not subject to the provisions of the _BCO_, Chapter 14, relating to proportionate representation of all Presbyteries or for equal representation of Teaching and Ruling Elders. A vacancy on the Board of Directors because of death, resignation, removal, disqualification, or otherwise may be filled by the directors for the unexpired portion of the term subject to the approval of the next General Assembly. **Article V1.2** The Board of Trustees of Covenant College shall consist of twenty-eight members each elected to a four-year term. The Board is divided into four classes of seven ~~men~~ members each such that the terms of one-fourth of the Board members expire each year. Any member in good standing in a church or Presbytery in the Presbyterian Church in America or a member of a denomination with which the PCA is in ecclesiastical fellowship may be elected a Trustee. At least three fourths (21) of the Trustees must be PCA Teaching or Ruling Elders. Trustees who have not been ordained to one of those offices must affirm the questions proposed to ruling elders or deacons at the time of their ordination and installation ( _BCO_ 24-6) with the exception that in the fourth question, the phrase “the office of ruling elder (or deacon, as the case may be) in this church” be replaced with “the position of Trustee of Covenant College,” and the phrase “of which God has made you an officer” at the end of that question be deleted. There is no required formula for dividing the members of a class between teaching and ruling elders. A Trustee shall be eligible at the end of any full four-year term for re-election to a second four year term, after which there must be a one-year interval before reelection. The General Assembly of the PCA may choose to elect Trustees to fill unfinished terms of Trustees who vacated their office before their term expired. The Trustee who is elected to fill the unfinished term is eligible, if reelected, to serve one additional successive term, after which a one-year period must elapse before ~~het~~ he Trustee is eligible for re-election. Up to four ~~men~~ members of denominations with which the PCA is in ecclesiastical fellowship may be elected, one to each class. In addition, the Board may make requests to the Presbyteries to nominate specific ~~men~~ members to the Board and may submit to the Assembly Nominating Committee letters of recommendation concerning particular nominees from the presbyteries. Furthermore, the Board may recommend one nominee per class from another NAPARC member denomination for consideration by the Assembly Nominating Committee, with a maximum of two such members permitted on the Board at one time. **Article VI.3** The Board of Trustees of Covenant Theological Seminary shall consist of not less than twelve and not more than thirty-two members [currently twenty-four]. The members of the Board of Trustees are each elected to a four-year term. The Board is divided equally into four classes, the terms of one-fourth of the Board members expiring each year. A Trustee shall be eligible at the end of any full four-year term for re-election to a second four-year term, after which there must be a one-year interval before re-election. The General Assembly of the PCA may choose to elect Trustees to fill unfinished terms of Trustees who vacated their office before their term expired. The Trustee who is elected to fill the unfinished term is eligible, if reelected, to serve one additional successive term, after which a one year period must elapse before ~~het~~ he Trustee is eligible for re-election. each trustees hall be a member in good standing of a church ora presbytery in the presbyterian church in america ora member of a denomination with which the PCA is in ecclesiastical fellowship and elected by the General Assembly. At least two-thirds of the Trustees must be ~~an~~ ordained teaching or ruling elders of the Presbyterian Church in America. Trustees who have not been ordained to one of those offices must affirm the questions proposed to ruling elders or deacons at the time of their ordination and installation ( _BCO_ 24-6) with the exception that in the fourth question, the phrase “the office of ruling elder (or deacon, as the case may be) in this church” be replaced with “the position of Trustee of Covenant Theological Seminary,” and the phrase “of which God has made you an officer” at the end of that question be deleted _._ ~~and elected by the General Assembly,~~ ~~except that uU~~ p to two members of each class may be ~~elders~~ members of denominations with which the PCA is in ecclesiastical fellowship. There is no required formula for dividing the members of a class between teaching and ruling elders. In addition, the Board may make requests to the Presbyteries to nominate specific ~~men~~ members to the Board and may submit to the Assembly Nominating Committee letters of recommendation concerning particular nominees from the presbyteries. Furthermore, the Board may recommend one nominee per class from another NAPARC member denomination for consideration by the Assembly Nominating Committee, with a maximum of two such members permitted on the Board at one time. **Article VI-4** The Directors of Ridge Haven, Inc. shall consist of ten (10) members, divided into five (5) classes of two (2) ~~men~~ members, each serving five-(5-)year terms. The General Assembly shall elect at each Assembly a Class of Directors to begin service immediately following the conclusion of the Assembly. In addition, the Ridge Haven Board may make request to presbyteries to nominate specific ~~men~~ members to the Board and may submit to the Assembly Nominating Committee letters of recommendation concerning particular nominees from presbyteries. Each member of the Board of Directors must be a member in good standing of a church ora presbytery in the presbyterian Church in America. At least seven (7) members of the Board of Directors must be either a Teaching or Ruling Elder in the Presbyterian Church in America. Directors who have not been ordained to one of those offices must affirm the questions proposed to ruling elders or deacons at the time of their ordination and installation ( _BCO_ 24-6) with the exception that in the fourth question, the phrase “the office of ruling elder (or deacon, as the case may be) in this church” be replaced with “the position of Director of Ridge Haven,” and the phrase “of which God has made you an officer” at the end of that question be deleted. The members of the Board of Directors of Ridge Haven are not subject to the _BCO_ Chapter 14 relating to proportionate representation of all Presbyteries or for equal representation of Teaching and Ruling Elders. Directors shall be eligible for reelection to a second five-year term, after which there must be a one-year interval before further re-election. **Article VI-5,** third paragraph As stated above, the Directors shall be elected through the standard nomination and election procedures, except that the Board of Directors may make requests to the Presbyteries to nominate specific ~~men~~ members for election as Directors, and may submit to the Assembly Nominating Committee letters of recommendation concerning particular nominees for election as Directors from the Presbyteries. All of the members of the Board of Directors shall be members in good standing of a church or Presbytery in the Presbyterian Church in America. At least seven (7) of the members of the Board of Directors must be either Teaching Elders, Ruling Elders or Deacons, and at least one half of ~~such~~ the members (5) shall be Ruling Elders and Deacons. Directors who have not been ordained to one of those offices must affirm the questions proposed to ruling elders or deacons at the time of their ordination and installation ( _BCO_ 24-6) with the exception that in the fourth question, the phrase “the office of ruling elder (or deacon, as the case may be) in this church” be replaced with “the position of Director of Presbyterian Church in America Foundation, Inc.,” and the phrase “of which God has made you an officer” at the end of that question be deleted. **So that Article VI of the “Corporate Bylaws of the Presbyterian** **Church in America” would read as follows:** **ARTICLE VI. OTHER BOARDS AND AGENCIES** The Assembly has authority to make exceptions to the above guidelines for some boards, agencies and committees not specifically covered by the _BCO_, by making amendments to these bylaws spelling out the specific exceptions, as well as approving corporation bylaws in conformity with these exceptions. 1. PCA Retirement & Benefits, Inc., hereinafter referred to as “RBI,” shall provide such services in furtherance of the religious purposes of this Corporation as may be agreed between RBI and the corporation from time to time. Specifically, but not in limitation thereof, RBI shall administer and serve as the trustee of the assets of the Retirement plans, the group insurance plans and the ministerial relief programs of the Corporation. No action of the General Assembly, the Corporation, or RBI shall conflict with provisions of the “Trust Agreement for the Tax- Sheltered Annuity Plan of the …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
