# GA47 O31 — Form Ad Interim Committee on Domestic Abuse & Sexual Assault

**Assembly:** 47th (2019)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 31 from Eastern Pennsylvania Presbytery (to AC, OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered by reference

*Source: [ga47_2019 p. 662](../markdown/ga47_2019.md#ga47-p662)*

---

“Form an Ad Interim Committee to Address Matters Related to Domestic Abuse, Domestic Oppression, and Sexual Assault” (Version 6)

**Be it resolved:** 1. That the 47th General Assembly create a seven-member Ad Interim Committee (AIC) tasked to accomplish the following. a. Prepare an annotated bibliography of recommended pastoral resources available on the nature of domestic abuse, domestic oppression, [15] and sexual assault, as well as pastoral resources for the care of victims of these sins; b. Explore these matters from an historical perspective, giving special consideration of how they have been conceived of and addressed within the Reformed tradition and provide a summary of their findings. c. Describe "best practices" and policy guidelines that could be helpful for elders, Sessions, Presbyteries, and agencies for protecting against these sins and for responding to them; d. If the Committee deems it prudent, it may include in the report any revisions or additions to _BCO_ Rules of Discipline that might more appropriately protect victims of these sins within a biblical process, which changes may be issued as an overture to a subsequent General Assembly by any Presbytery that would wish to do so; e. If the Committee deems it prudent, it may include in the report any statement the Committee might recommend for the GA to consider adopting regarding any PCA repentance related to these matters, which statement may be issued as an overture to a subsequent General Assembly by any Presbytery that would wish to do so. 2. The 47th GA authorizes the Moderator of the 47th GA to appoint the seven voting members of this Committee. ( _RAO_ 9-4) a. These members shall be PCA ministers or PCA ruling elders, and the Committee shall include at least two of each. (Presbyteries, Sessions, and individuals may contact the Moderator with suggested names.) b. The 47th GA authorizes the Moderator to make all of his appointments after the 47th GA adjourns. ( _RAO_ 9-4) 3. The 47th GA authorizes the Moderator to appoint others to serve the Committee as advisors, regardless of gender or denominational affiliation, within the confines of its budget. The 47th GA recommends the Moderator appoint at least two women who are subject-matter experts and voting members. 15 Domestic oppression is an ongoing pattern of intimidating and domineering behavior employed by one family member to control one or more other family members. A superior/inferior, hierarchical power differential is established, maintained, and increased more and more as time goes on... domestic oppressors systematically tyrannize, intimidate, threaten, emotionally coerce, dehumanize, objectify, demean, degrade, manipulate, and bully at least one other person within the family home—usually their spouse. Source: [Rev. Warren Lamb, https://pastorlamb.com/2018/05/08/domestic-oppression-time-to-talk-](https://pastorlamb.com/2018/05/08/domestic-oppression-time-to-talk-about-i) [about-i](https://pastorlamb.com/2018/05/08/domestic-oppression-time-to-talk-about-i) 4. Budget and Funding – The AIC budget shall be $15,000, all of which shall come from contributions to the AC designated for the AIC. (The Pacific Northwest Presbytery will commit to contribute $1,000 to that end.) 5. Reporting The Committee shall either report its findings on 1.a (bibliography) and 1.c (best practices) directly to the 48th GA, or at that time request an extension ( _RAO_ 9-4). **Rationale** : 1. The sins of domestic abuse and sexual assault are expressly forbidden by Scripture and the Westminster Standards. (For example, see 2 Timothy 3:2-5; Jude 7; Exodus 21:15; Deuteronomy 22:25-27; also, _WLC_ 135 and 139.) 2. These sins are especially heinous as they are “against the express letter of the law,” “break many commandments,” “admit of no reparation,” and often involve various other aggravations ( _WLC_ 151). 3. Sadly, these sins are prevalent in our society, and in the church. [16] 4. These sins often produce in the victims a complex response of denial along with immense fear and shame that persist with varying severity throughout life (e.g., 2 Samuel 13:1-22). 5. It is the responsibility of the elders of the Church to exercise their authority, severally and jointly, to shepherd those who are under their care by guarding against such sinful behavior as much as possible, by wisely caring for those victimized by the sins of others, and by appropriately disciplining those guilty of such sins, with an aim toward a full repentance. 6. these sins have been a concern and a subject of attention not only in other denominations but even in the proceedings of the 46th General Assembly. 7. In 2014, the 42nd General Assembly (Houston, TX) exhorted the PCA and its courts to respond boldly against one form of these sins, namely the sexual abuse of children. 16 For example, the National Domestic Violence Hotline reports: “More than 1 in 3 women (35.6%) and more than 1 in 4 men (28.5%) in the United States have experienced rape, physical violence and/or stalking by an intimate partner in their lifetime.” (Available at www.thehotline.org/resources/statistics/, accessed 6/15/18). For further statistics on sexual violence see the National Center for Injury Prevention and Controls Report titled _Sexual_ _Violence Surveillance: Uniform Definitions and Recommended Data Elements_ (Atlanta: CDC, 2014; available at [www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/sv_surveillance_definitionsl-2009-](http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/sv_surveillance_definitionsl-2009-a.pdf) [a.pdf](http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/sv_surveillance_definitionsl-2009-a.pdf) ). 8. Many PCA ministers, ruling elders, and candidates report a desire to be resourced in order to provide better pastoral care on these sins and their resulting complex consequences. 9. Many PCA ministers, ruling elders, and candidates report a desire to learn of "best practices" regarding church and presbytery policies in this area. For example, some ministers and elders are unaware of the different levels of background checks that can be utilized in screening. Some do not know what their State's laws are regarding mandatory reporters or in what situations those laws may or may not apply. 10. Our _BCO_ Part II Rules of Discipline might benefit from additions or revisions that address these matters. For example, the following _BCO_ provisions might benefit from review and revision, at least in the context of a minor who accuses an adult of sexual misconduct: _BCO_ 35-1....The accused party may be allowed, but shall not be compelled to testify; but the accuser shall be required to testify, on the demand of the accused. ... _BCO_ 32-13. In order that the trial may be fair and impartial, the witnesses shall be examined in the presence of the accused, or at least after he shall have received due citation to attend. Witnesses may be cross-examined by both parties, and any questions asked must be pertinent to the issue. _BCO_ 32-20. Process, in case of scandal, shall commence within the space of one year after the offense was committed, unless it has recently become flagrant…. _BCO_ 35-4. no witness afterwards to be examined, unless a member of the court, shall be present during the examination of another witness on the same case, if either party object. 11. Reporting Recommendations through the Overtures Committee In the past, Ad Interim Committees have customarily reported recommendations directly to the GA floor. But going through the OC is a more prudent and efficient path for any AIC recommendations on _BCO_ changes and/or any recommended statement for GA adoption. Furthermore, _RAO_ 12-1 stipulates " _all_ recommendations proposing amendment to the Constitution _shall_ be referred to the Overtures Committee for their review and recommendation to the General Assembly." And this would also be the most prudent and efficient path for any _BCO_ recommendation from this AIC. The _RAO_ section on OC reports to GA provides a wiser method for handling all recommendations from the AIC: _RAO_ 15-8.c. "A recommendation [from the OC] shall be considered under the standard rules governing debate, but Subsidiary Motions ( _RRO_ VI) to _Postpone Indefinitely_, to _Amend_, to _Commit,_ and to _Limit Debate_ ; and Incidental Motions ( _RRO_ VIII) to _Divide a Question_, to _Consider_ _Seriatim_, and _Constitutional Inquiries_, shall **not** be permitted. A motion to _Recommit_ shall be permitted, but a motion to _Recommit With Instructions_ shall not be permitted." If the 2019 Dallas GA Overtures Committee, and then the Dallas GA, want recommendations from this particular AIC to go through the 2020 Birmingham OC first, that is certainly the constitutional prerogative of the commissioners in Dallas. _Adopted by Eastern Pennsylvania Presbytery at its stated meeting, April 9, 2019_ _Attested by TE Mel Farrar, stated clerk_

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
