# GA47 O7 — Form Ad Interim Committee on Domestic Abuse & Sexual Assault

**Assembly:** 47th (2019)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 7 from Pacific Northwest Presbytery (to CCB, OC, AC)  ·  **Disposition:** Adopted (final)

*Source: [ga47_2019 p. 598](../markdown/ga47_2019.md#ga47-p598)*

---

“Form an Ad Interim Committee to Address Matters Related to Domestic Abuse, Domestic Oppression, and Sexual Assault”

**Be it resolved:** 1. That the 47th General Assembly create a seven-man Study Committee on Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault tasked to accomplish the following. a. The Committee shall prepare an annotated bibliography of resources the Committee endorses on topics related to child abuse and sexual assault, domestic abuse and sexual assault, and domestic oppression. [1] The annotated bibliography should also include pastoral resources for the care of victims of these sins, as well as ministry and counsel for those overtaken by these sins. b. The Committee shall report regarding best practices and guidelines that could be helpful for elders, Sessions, Presbyteries, and agencies 1 Rev. Warren Lamb (Th.M., MS, MA) Vancouver Bible Institute & Truth in Love Biblical Counseling Center "Domestic oppression is an ongoing pattern of intimidating and domineering behavior employed by one family member to control one or more other family members. A superior/inferior, hierarchical power differential is established, maintained, and increased more and more as time goes on...." "Domestic oppressors systematically tyrannize, intimidate, threaten, emotionally coerce, dehumanize, objectify, demean, degrade, manipulate, and bully at least one other person within the family home - usually their spouse." [https://pastorlamb.com/2018/05/08/domestic-oppression-time-to-talk-about-i](https://pastorlamb.com/2018/05/08/domestic-oppression-time-to-talk-about-i) [https://www.vancouverbible.com/our-staff.html](https://www.vancouverbible.com/our-staff.html) & [https://www.tilbcc.com/biblical-counseling-team1.html](https://www.tilbcc.com/biblical-counseling-team1.html) for protecting against these sins and for responding to them. However, no practice, policy, or guideline will be proposed for adoption or approval. It is simply information, which shall not be binding or obligatory in any sense. c. The Committee may recommend to the 48th GA (Birmingham 2020) any statement(s) it believes would be prudent and warranted for the Assembly to adopt. d. The Committee may recommend to the 48th GA any revisions or additions to _BCO_ Rules of Discipline that might help prevent these sins, protect and care for victims, procure justice, and lead offenders to repentance. Reporting procedure is governed by _RAO_ 12-1. _RAO_ 12-1: ...All recommendations [from permanent Committees and Agencies, special committees, and ad interim committees of the GA] proposing amendment to the constitution shall be referred to the Overtures Committee for their review and recommendation to the General Assembly under the rules governing a committee of commissioners as applicable ( _RAO_ 14-6.d.-k.; 14-7.c.-d.; 14-9.d.-h.) [Underlining added. See also _RAO_ 15-1.] Any proposed constitutional amendments shall also be referred to the Committee on Constitutional Business for advice. ( _RAO_ 8-2.b.3 & b.4) 2. The 47th GA authorizes the GA Moderator to appoint the seven voting members of this Committee, per _RAO_ 9-4 and _RAO_ 19-1 (Robert's Rules, RONR, 11th ed., pp. 174-175, pp. 495-496, and p. 579). a. These members shall be PCA ministers or PCA ruling elders, and the Committee shall include at least two of each. (Anyone may suggest names to the Moderator.) b. The 47th GA authorizes the Moderator to make his appointments after the 47th GA adjourns. 3. The 47th GA authorizes the Moderator to appoint others to serve the Committee as non-voting advisors, regardless of denominational affiliation or gender. The 47th GA recommends the Moderator consider appointing, as advisors, at least two subject-matter experts and at least two women. 4. Committee budget shall be $15,000. This expense shall be included in the Administrative Committee budget. Presbyteries, churches, and individuals are highly encouraged to contribute funds to the AC, designated for this work. (The Pacific NW Presbytery has approved $1,000 to that end.) **Rationale for the Need** : A. The sins of domestic abuse and sexual assault are expressly forbidden by Scripture and the Westminster Standards. (For example, see 2 Timothy 3:2-5; Jude 7; Exodus 21:15; Deuteronomy 22:25-27; _WLC_ 135 and 139.) B. These sins are especially heinous as they are “against the express letter of the law,” “break many commandments,” “admit of no reparation,” and often involve various other aggravations ( _WLC_ 151). C. Sadly, these sins are prevalent in our society [2], and, to some extent, even appear in the Church. [3] D. These sins often produce in the victims a complex response of denial along with immense fear and shame that persist with varying severity throughout life (e.g., 2 Samuel 13:1-22). E. It is the responsibility of the elders of the Church to exercise their authority, severally and jointly, to shepherd those who are under their care by guarding against such sinful behavior as much as possible, by wisely caring for those victimized by the sins of others, and by appropriately disciplining those guilty of such sins, with an aim toward a full repentance. F In 2014, the 42nd General Assembly (Houston, TX) exhorted the PCA and its courts to respond boldly against one form of these sins, namely the sexual abuse of children. ( _M42GA_, pp. 58-60) The OC, by a vote of 89-0, recommended the Houston GA adopt a revised version of Georgia Foothills Overture 6, and the GA adopted it. Twenty-three other Presbyteries had filed similar child-protection overtures, and all were answered by reference to the action on Overture 6.) 2 For example, the National Domestic Violence Hotline reports: “More than 1 in 3 women (35.6%) and more than 1 in 4 men (28.5%) in the United States have experienced rape, physical violence and/or stalking by an intimate partner in their lifetime.” (Available at www.thehotline.org/resources/statistics/, accessed 6/15/18). For further statistics on sexual violence see the National Center for Injury Prevention and Controls Report titled _Sexual_ _Violence Surveillance: Uniform Definitions and Recommended Data Elements_ (Atlanta: CDC, 2014; available at [www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/sv_surveillance_definitionsl](http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/sv_surveillance_definitionsl-2009-a.pdf) [2009-a.pdf](http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/sv_surveillance_definitionsl-2009-a.pdf) ). 3 [https://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/investigations/article/Southern-Baptist-sexual-](https://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/investigations/article/Southern-Baptist-sexual-abuse-spreads-as-leaders-13588038.php) [abuse-spreads-as-leaders-13588038.php](https://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/investigations/article/Southern-Baptist-sexual-abuse-spreads-as-leaders-13588038.php) G Many PCA ministers, ruling elders, and candidates report a desire to be resourced in order to provide better pastoral care on these sins and their resulting complex consequences. H. Many PCA ministers, ruling elders, and candidates report a desire to learn of "best practices" in these matters. For example, some ministers and elders are unaware of the different levels of background checks that can be utilized in screening. Some do not know what their State's laws are regarding mandatory reporters, or in what situations those laws may or may not apply. I. Our _BCO_ Part II Rules of Discipline might benefit from additions or revisions that address these matters. The following _BCO_ provisions are examples of some that _might_ benefit from review and revision (at least, for example, in the context of a minor who accuses an adult of abuse or sexual misconduct): _BCO_ 32-20. Process, in case of scandal, shall commence within the space of one year after the offense was committed, unless it has recently become flagrant. _BCO_ 32-13. In order that the trial may be fair and impartial, the witnesses shall be examined in the presence of the accused, ...Witnesses may be cross-examined by both parties,... _BCO_ 35-4. no witness afterwards to be examined, unless a member of the court, shall be present during the examination of another witness on the same case, if either party object. **Review of** _**RAO**_ **Procedures on Proposed Constitutional Amendments** While ad interim and study committees ordinarily report recommendations directly to the GA floor, if they propose constitutional amendments, _RAO_ 12-1 requires them to be referred to the OC. But in such instances, the OC would act in many regards like a committee of commissioners. _RAO_ 12-1. The permanent Committees and Agencies, special committees, and ad interim committees of the Assembly shall make annual reports, which shall be transmitted to the Stated Clerk by at least ninety (90) days prior to the opening of the General Assembly. The Stated Clerk shall refer these reports to the relevant committee of commissioners for their review and recommendation to the General Assembly (cf. 14-6; 14-7). The Nominating Committee, the Committee on Review of Presbytery Records, the Standing Judicial Commission, the Committee on Constitutional Business, and ad interim committees shall report directly to the General Assembly without reference to a committee of commissioners. However, all recommendations proposing amendment to the Constitution shall be referred to the Overtures Committee for their review and recommendation to the General Assembly under the rules governing a committee of commissioners _as applicable_ ( _RAO_ 14-6.d-k; 14-7.c-d; 14-9.d-h). [Emphasis added. See also _RAO_ 15-1. [4] ] The OC would function under certain _RAO_ 14 rules, instead of entirely under _RAO_ 15 rules (i.e., the fifteen paragraphs from _RAO_ 14 cited in the parenthesis). Thus, if any of those fifteen provisions stipulate something different than what is stipulated in _RAO_ Chapter 15 (Overtures Committee), the _RAO_ 14 (Committee of Commissioners) provision governs. One difference, for example, regards the allowance or disallowance of an OC minority report. _RAO_ 15-6.s allows minority reports from the OC when the OC is acting in its ordinary _RAO_ 15 capacity. But _RAO_ 14-6.h prohibits minority reports from committees of commissioners. And since _RAO_ 14-6.h is included in the parenthetical list in _RAO_ 12-1, that prohibition would govern the OC when it reports a recommendation on a constitutional amendment proposed by any study committee. Presumably, this is because a substitute motion from a committee of Commissioners is like a minority report when it proposes something different from what is proposed by a Permanent Committee. Likewise, a substitute recommendation from the oc would beak into a minority report on a GA appointed study committee recommendation. in the event there was a minority report from a study committee on a proposed constitutional amendment, the OC would also consider it. The OC would report recommendations on each to the GA. and if the oc recommends a substitute fora constitutional amendment proposed by the study committee, the procedures and time limits for debate are the same as those for handling an OC minority report on an ordinary OC recommendation (i.e., _RAO_ 14.9.h.1-3 and _RAO_ 15-8.g.1-3). 4 _RAO_ 15-1 Overtures Committee shall consider and make recommendation upon all overtures or recommendations (cf. _RAO_ 12-1) proposing amendment to the Constitution, and all other overtures referred by the Stated Clerk. _RAO_ 14.9.h. if a committee of commissioners [OC in this case] offers a substitute fora recommendation of a permanent Committee or Agency [or Study Committee in this case], the substitute shall be presented to the Assembly as follows ... Regardless of whether the OC recommended approval or a substitute, _RAO_ 14-9.e would apply to the debate on the GA floor. (The same rule applied to recommendations that ordinariliy come from OC, that is, _RAO_ 15-8.c.) _RAO_ 14-9.e. A recommendation [from a committee of commissioners] shall be considered under the …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
