# GA48 O44 — Transfer Berks County, Pennsylvania to Philadelphia Metro West Presbytery

**Assembly:** 48th (2021)  ·  **Source:** Philadelphia Metro West Presbytery, “Transfer  ·  **Disposition:** Answered by reference

*Source: [ga48_2021 p. 383](../markdown/ga48_2021.md#ga48-p383)*

---

Berks County, Pennsylvania, to Philadelphia Metro West Presbytery,” p.1089, **be answered in the affirmative** with an effective date of July 2, 2021. 9. That TE CH (COL) Steve William Prost, USA, and TE CH (LTC) James Cotton Pakala, USA, Ret., be appointed to serve as PCA members of the Presbyterian and Reformed Commission on Chaplains and Military Personnel (PRCC) for the Class of 2022. That Major General Brook J. Leonard, USAF, and TE Capt. Paul Riley Wrigley, CHC, Ret., be appointed to serve as PCA members of the Presbyterian and Reformed Commission on Chaplains and Military Personnel (PRCC) for the Class of 2023. That RE Maj Gen Bentley B Rayburn, USAF, Ret., and TE Ch (Maj) Chad Steven Montgomery, USAF, be appointed to serve as PCA members of the Presbyterian and Reformed Commission on Chaplains and Military Personnel (PRCC) for the Class of 2025. **Attachment 1** **2019 CHURCH PLANTERS PLACED ON THE FIELD** **This church planter list is compiled by MNA staff through contact** **with the presbyteries and attempts to identify every church planter** **who moved to the field prior to December 31, 2019. In listing these** **mission churches, MNA does not intend to imply that MNA had** **direct involvement with each and every mission church. The** **majority of the listed mission churches utilized MNA services;** **others were established solely by presbyteries or sponsoring** **churches. teaching elders assigned to anew site of a multi-** **congregation church are included in this list as church planters** **placed on the field. Some church planters listed here may have been** **placed in previous years but not reported at the time.** **Presbytery** **Last Name** **First Name** **Location** Arizona Baysinger JC Queens Creek AZ Arizona Beach Justin Peoria AZ Central Carolina Hodge Chris Lake Wylie SC Central Carolina Johnston Ralph Sanford NC Central Indiana Doane Keith Noblesville IN Covenant Brewer Hunter Collierville TN Covenant Husband Sam Memphis TN Evangel Garcia Ronnie La Travasia/ San Juan PR Evangel Garcia Ronnie Trinity/Dorado PR Great Lakes Irvin Joel Elkhart IN Eastern Canada Chhauger Michael Ottawa ON Eastern Carolina Inman Tim Dunn NC Georgia Foothills Thompson John Lilburn GA Hills and Plains Johnson Peter Bartlesville OK Hills and Plains Shutt Casey Oklahoma City OK Illiana Rufener Chris Terre Haute IN Iowa Ferrell Isaac Cedar Rapids IA Low Country Francis Nathan Charleston SC Low Country Hamby Rob Charleston SC Metro New York Plant David Chelsea/NYC NY Missouri Williams Thurman St. Louis MO Nashville Tan Timothy Brentwood TN New River Hagar Alan Buckhannon WV Northern California Hong Richard Fremont CA Northern California Park Soo Sang Sunnydale CA Ohio Piteo Jason Cleveland OH Pacific Northwest Frey Brian Boise Idaho Potomac NuQuay Abraham Waldorf MD Potomac Sicks Chris Falls Church VA Rocky Mountain Weston Brett Centennial CO Rocky Mountain Wooten Rob Billings MT *South Coast Jones Brad Vista CA Southern Louisiana Bond Harris Monroe LA SW Florida Harris Ben Palm Bay FL SW Florida St. Germain Dony Tidewater Brock Jimmy Virginia Beach VA Tidewater Cartwright Chris Exmore VA Wisconsin Sinnard Ben Delafield WI *Re-plant **2019 New Multi-Site/Additional Church Sites Added** Potomac Yancey Rob Fairfax/Annadale VA **2020 CHURCH PLANTERS PLACED ON THE FIELD** **This church planter list is compiled by MNA staff through contact with** **the presbyteries and attempts to identify every church planter who** **moved to the field prior to December 31, 2020. In listing these mission** **churches, MNA does not intend to imply that MNA had direct** **involvement with each and every mission church. The majority of the** **listed mission churches utilized MNA services; others were established** **solely by presbyteries or sponsoring churches. Teaching Elders assigned** **to anew site of a multi-congregation church are included in this list as** **church planters placed on the field. Some church planters listed here** **may have been placed in previous years but not reported at the time.** **Presbytery** **Last Name** **First Name** **Location** Arizona Korljan Scott Scottsdale AZ Calvary Davis Jonathan Greenville SC Central Carolina Portillo José Charlotte NC Central Carolina Yoran David Charlotte NC Eastern Carolina McCutcheon Russell Knightdale NC Eastern Carolina Wong Didi Durham NC Korean Capital Kim Dong Woo Laurel MD Korean Capital Lee Moses Rockville MD Korean NE Yu Hyo Chul Flushing NY Korean Southern Kim Sangtae Korean SW Lee Dong Yeob Metro Atlanta Harwell Andrew Atlanta GA Metro Atlanta Heard Bill Franklin GA Metro Atlanta Truong Hung Atlanta GA Nashville Edmonson Mika Nashville TN New River Eades David Fairmont WV North Texas Dietsch Peter Killeen TX North Texas Belonga Mark Prosper TX Northern Illinois Lawrence Stephen Springfield IL Pacific Northwest Harris Craig Yakima WA Pacific Northwest Neville Jon Ferndale WA Philadelphia Pugh Philadelphia PA South Texas Pozos Elias McAllen TX Susquehanna Valley Victa III Francisco Lebanon PA Suncoast Florida Knaebel Chris Sarasota FL ***Plants Not Previously Reported in Past Years** **Presbytery** **Last Name** **First Name Location** **Year** E. Pennsylvania Inawashiro Diogo Glenside PA 2017 E. Pennsylvania Ewing Spencer Philadelphia PA 2017 Great Lakes Seneker Ben Grand Rapids MI 2019 Heartland Suber Aaron Lee's Summit MO 2019 James River Winfree Ambrose Midlothian VA 2018 Metro Atlanta Veerman Erik Tucker GA 2018 Missouri Simmons Jay St. Louis MO 2019 Nashville Avery Matt Nashville TN 2018 New Jersey Lindberg David Moorestown NJ 2019 Rio Grande Hunt Dustin Las Cruces NM 2018 Rocky Mtn. Chappell Justin Longmont CO 2017 **Attachment 2** **MNA CHAPLAIN MINISTRIES REPORT ON 2019 & 2020** **ACTIVITIES** **THANKSGIVING AND PRAISE:** We are thankful for the generosity of God’s people as our 2019 & 2020 operating expenses were covered with gifts from churches, presbyteries, individuals, and PRCC Denominations. We are also thankful for the generosity of MNA’s administration in managing databases, salaries, printing support, and much more. Their devotion and dedication have made a significant impact in empowering our Chaplain Ministry. As of December 31, 2020, the PCA had a total of 219 endorsed Chaplains (166 Military Chaplains and Seminary Candidates, and 58 Civilian Chaplains, 5 of which who are both). The PRCC continues to endorse military and civilian Chaplains in a variety of settings including those of its seven member or associate member denominations in the Presbyterian and Reformed Commission on Chaplains (PRCC): the Presbyterian Church in America (PCA), the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church (ARPC), the Korean American Presbyterian Church (KAPC), the Korean Presbyterian Church in America (KPCA), the Orthodox Presbyterian Church (OPC), the Reformed Presbyterian Church in North America (RPCNA), and the United Churches of North America (URCNA). I serve as the Endorser for these denominations as well as the PCA. The PRCC endorses and supports a total of 312 Chaplains from all member denominations. **2019 HIGHLIGHTS:** June 2019 Chaplains Training Conference was hosted by Fort Worth Presbyterian Church. We had over 60 Chaplains and many spouses and children attend our annual training, which was led by Dr. Richard Pratt and Nancy Guthrie. It was an amazing time of study and spiritual renewal for our Chaplains and their family members. The PRCC held is first Annual New Chaplain Training Event at the Bonclarken Conference Center at Flat Rock, NC., September 11-13, 2019. There were nine Attendees. TE Michael Stewart came on board the PRCC Staff as the Associate Endorser for Civilian Chaplains. Dr. Stewart served as a Board-Certified Hospital Chaplain for twenty-seven years, and served on the PRCC Commission for several years before coming on staff. **2020 HIGHLIGHTS** Due to the Covid 19 pandemic, the 2020 Chaplains Training Conference was cancelled. We, like so many ministries, have tried to adjust using virtual platforms to stay in touch with our PRCC Chaplains. We hosted three rounds of virtual PRCC Chaplain meetings and were able to “Virtually Visit” over 201 PRCC Chaplains (64%) of our total Chaplains. This is the highest percentage of Chaplains visited in a single year ever! PTL! Civilian Chaplain Population: We are blessed to see our Civilian Chaplain ministry continue to grow. Whether they be Hospital, Corrections, Retirement, Hospice, Law Enforcement, and other types we are encouraged to see our gracious Lord growing this ministry and for so many Teaching Elders entering this special calling. Chaplain Recruitment: Our goal for 2019 was to add 20 new Chaplains and/or Chaplain Candidates to the PRCC Family. The Lord brought us 27! Our goal for 2020 was also to add 20 new Chaplains or Chaplain Candidates. The Lord added 30 new Chaplains to the PRCC in 2020! For the second year in a row, we were blessed to end both 2019 & 2020 with the largest number of PRCC Chaplains & Candidates ever! We ended 2020 with a total of 312 Endorsed PRCC Chaplains. PRCC Staff: TE Don Sampson came on board the PRCC Staff as an Associate Endorser for Military Chaplains. TE Sampson retired from the Marine Reserves as a Colonel, served as a church planter pastor for 18 years, and also served on the PRCC Commission for several years before coming on staff in july of 2020. It is a blessing to serve with the three other godly Teaching Elders and one godly Ruling Elder, and the wife of a retired Army LTC who make up the MNA Chaplain Staff. TE Mack Griffith, TE Mike Stewart, TE Don Sampson, Mrs. Bekah Lawing and RE Gary Hitzfeld are a true blessing and make this ministry so fulfilling. These folks are outstanding servants and make significant contributions to the pastoral care of our Chaplains. **CHURCH AND PRESBYTERY SUPPORT PROGRAMS** **Congregational Sponsorship:** It is our goal to enlist three sponsoring congregations for every full-time military and civilian Chaplain. The primary purpose of the Sponsorship Program is to enlist prayer support for the Chaplain, his ministry, his family, and for those he serves. The sponsoring Chaplain, in turn, will provide at least three update reports per year with prayer requests to the congregation or presbytery. **Presbytery Chaplain Advocacy (CA) Program:** We are in the process of recruiting a cadre of Teaching and Ruling Elders who are active in their presbyteries to serve as Chaplain Advocates. Ideally, these men will: - Keep in touch with the Chaplain members of his presbytery. Encourage those Chaplains to (1) keep their Stated Clerk appraised of any changes to their current contact information, addresses and family circumstances, (2) send the Stated Clerk a request for an “excused absence” when they will not be able to attend a scheduled Presbytery Meeting, (3) participate in “virtual” meetings whenever that is an option. - Bring these Chaplain brothers up in prayer at each meeting. - Invite Chaplains to pray or share an update occasionally when they are able to attend or send a video or letter. - Stay aware of PRCC/MNA Chaplain Ministries by reading and praying through The Guardian Prayer Calendar (our tri-annual publication of brief Chaplain reports and specific prayer requests). - Update the presbytery of any current PRCC/Chaplain Ministries needs or activities of which he is made aware. (i.e., the CFC Campaign each fall). Contact us to learn more about this ministry: [ChaplainMinistries@pcanet.org](mailto:ChaplainMinistries@pcanet.org) **Missions Conferences:** More and more congregations are asking us and our Chaplains to preach and speak at numerous mission conferences, and this has been a blessing. We encourage our ministers and congregations to ask our Chaplains or members of our PRCC staff to come and speak. The Chaplaincy is about fulfilling the Great Commission and we deeply desire to spread the Gospel of Christ. **PLEASE JOIN IN PRAYER FOR THESE CURRENT REQUESTS** For Ministry …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
