# GA48 O24 — Reduce GA Registration Fee for Ruling Elders to $250

**Assembly:** 48th (2021)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered in the negative

*Source: [ga48_2021 p. 192](../markdown/ga48_2021.md#ga48-p192)*

---

46. That Overtures 45 and 46 entitled “Seek Asian American Flourishing” be answered in reference to the Overtures Committee recommendation, with the following factors of rationale: Rationale: 1) In Ephesians the Apostle Paul makes a strong argument that the gospel of grace in Christ Jesus is for all the ethnic groups in the world and argues further that all those who are in Christ Jesus are no longer “strangers to the covenants of promise,” and “have been brought near by the blood of Christ.” Paul goes on to explain both Jew and Gentile are reconciled to God in one body through the cross, and that all “have access in one Spirit to the Father. So then you are no longer strangers and aliens, but you are fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God…” (Ephesians 2:11-22 ESV). Paul reiterates this theme into Chapter 3 and even on into Chapter 4 where there is a discourse on the unity of the body of Christ in regard to living together and growing together. In a statement pulling much together Paul writes, “speaking the truth…” (Ephesians 4:15-16). It follows that we all who follow Christ Jesus must be concerned for the whole well being of His body and for the flourishing of all the parts! 2) In 2023 the 50th General Assembly will be held in Memphis, TN. The theme is expected to focus on praising God for his blessings during the first 50 years and beseeching God for His blessing for the next 50 years which, God willing, await the cause of the gospel and the progress of His church. We have sought a diverse group, including our Asian American members, to serve on the Celebration Committee. We will be thanking God, and praising him for the progress in diversity and petitioning Him for much more! 3) The PCA Administrative Committee and Committee on Discipleship Ministries are happy to work together on the proposed projects of this Overture in order to seek the flourishing Asian Americans in the PCA so that our entire body, diverse yet one, may flourish together for the glory of Christ and the good of the Church. 4) Please be aware that the themes of the General Assemblies are selected by the Host Committees. The PCA Administrative Committee has the right to suggest, and has influence, but not control or authority on the theme. The themes of the 48th, 49th, and 50th General Assemblies are already determined by their respective host committees. 47. That Overture 17 from Pacific Northwest Presbytery entitled “Revise _RAO_ 9-3 to Clarify Funding for Ad Interim Committees” be answered in reference to the Overtures Committee recommendation. Rationale: The proposed amendment of _RAO_ 9-3 has resulted from extensive consultation with a PNW Presbytery representative who made the original overture, a key OC representative, and AC staff. All have the same goals: to clarify the responsibilities, limitations, and funding for our important study committees while following the standards of our _BCO_ and protecting the financial integrity of the AC. Please consider the following practical factors: 1) Every year the AC prepares a financial budget _prior_ to the GA where study committees may be (or may not be) appointed with a great variance in proposed costs and number. The assumption that the AC can simply absorb the unknown costs and number of study committees (which typically request $15-$25 thousand each) is not realistic. The _RAO_ clearly limits the number of study committees that can be established without a two-thirds affirmative vote to try to protect the AC from excessive expenses, but most commissioners are not aware of why these protections are needed. 2) The realities of AC funding include: 1) less than half of PCA churches support any denominational mission or agency, including the AC; 2) during the second quarter of the pandemic, church giving to the AC dropped by two-thirds; 3) the AC budget has already been reduced 20 percent; 4) the GA has the potential of passing four study committees this year alone; 5) the GA has already instructed the AC to allocate new funds for a 50 [th] Anniversary Celebration – in effect, creating another Ad Interim Committee over the next two years. The AC is tightening its belt in all its practices and is asking all committees for which it is responsible (SJC, IPR, CMC, CCB, Nominations, etc.) to do the same. The AC simply cannot absorb unfunded GA mandates outside its budget that may total from $50-$200 thousand per year, depending on what GA passes in a given year. 3) Study committees are good and necessary aspects of our Presbyterian practices but their financing should not be seen only as “someone else’s responsibility.” In the past, we have had to ask members of the study committees to raise their own funds or sought designated funds to protect the operational budget of the AC. The Overture as amended is supported by the original proposer because it makes it clear that a study committee is afforded by funds raised and designated for that specific purpose and not by undesignated funds needed for the AC to fulfill its regular GA responsibilities. Anyone bringing forward a proposal fora study committee or any ad interim committee should consider these financial realities and inform the GA of realistic plans for funding for such a committee. Those serving on a new ad interim committee and the AC administrating the work of the committee certainly may contribute to this cause, but those making the proposal should also take up the responsibility for needed funding. The automatic default should not be the study committee members or the PCA Administrative Committee. 48. That _RAO_ 8-4.i be revised as follows: …The deadline for these nominations is the close of the afternoon session of the first full day of the Assembly. The Clerk’s office shall issue a supplement to the Assembly’s Nominating Committee report during the second full day’s business sessions. 49. That that _RAO_ 13-2 be revised as follows: New business must be presented to the General Assembly before the recess of the afternoon session on the first full day of business . . . 50. That to provide needed funding for the 50 [th] Celebration Committee, the AC budgets be amended with additional funds as follows: -$15,000 for the 2021 AC Budget -$30,000 for the 2022 AC Budget 51. From the PCA Board of Directors, that the PCA Committees and Agencies occupying the PCA Office Building located in Lawrenceville, GA, be granted permissions to rearrange through normal negotiations and agreements the space usage occupied by each ministry and to rearrange the facility after the pattern agreed upon, and further that the agreement be approved by the Administrative Committee prior to implementation and the Administrative Committee report the basic factors of the agreement, or the status thereof, back to the 49 [th] General Assembly scheduled to be held in Birmingham, a lin june of 2022. 52. That, in the event the Assembly upon recommendation of the Overtures Committee, approves the establishment of an ad interim committee on Critical Race Theory, the budget of such committee be $15,000 to be provided solely by designated gifts to the AC. **Attachment 1** **Resolution of Thanks for Dr. Roy Taylor**

**Whereas**, in 1998 at the St. Louis General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America, Roy Taylor answered the Lord Jesus Christ’s call to be our third Stated Clerk;

**Whereas**, during these subsequent years Roy Taylor has faithfully, prayerfully, and sacrificially served the Presbyterian Church in America as her Stated Clerk;

**Whereas**, during Roy Taylor’s tenure of service we have benefitted from his love, wisdom, and charity;

**Whereas**, during Roy Taylor’s we, as a denomination, have benefitted from his administrative and diplomatic gifts promoting and encouraging us to be “Faithful to the Scriptures, True to the Reformed Faith, and Obedient to the Great Commission;”

**Therefore, be it resolved** that the Administrative Committee of the Presbyterian Church in America express its great thanksgiving to our Lord Jesus Christ for Dr. L. Roy Taylor and his 22 years of service as Stated Clerk of the PCA.

**Be it further resolved** that we ask the Lord’s continued blessing upon Roy and Donna. **Attachment 2** **Annual Report of the PCA Historical Center** **to the PCA Administrative Committee** **March 26, 2021** Let me first mention the loss of our dear brother and a leading voice on the Advisory Committee, Rev. Henry Lewis Smith, who died on February 6 of this year. If you have not seen the fine eulogy which was posted at _byFaith_ _Online,_ please go to [https://byfaithonline.com/ henry-lewis-smith-1932-](https://byfaithonline.com/%20henry-lewis-smith-1932-2021/) [2021/](https://byfaithonline.com/%20henry-lewis-smith-1932-2021/) The PCA Historical Center is, to my knowledge, the second largest Presbyterian archive in the nation. And while we pale in comparison with the much older Presbyterian Historical Society in Philadelphia, still we have a clear purpose and our collections are, year by year, increasingly worthy of study. Organized in 1985, the PCA Historical Center is now entering its 37th year of service to the denomination. Our 40 [th] anniversary will arrive the year after the PCA celebrates its 50 [th] . And as our collections continue to grow and strengthen, I have every expectation they will serve the PCA well, for so long as our Lord allows us to preserve them. The importance of our history, as a measure of who we are and where we’ve come from, has never been more important. As a people who recognize the high value of covenant theology, we must also keep in mind the corollary command to remember the Lord’s works (Ps. 77:11-14, etc.). And as the Book of Acts gives indication, His works continue on past the pages of Scripture and into church history. The materials we work to gather, preserve, and make accessible at the PCA Historical Center are, ultimately, a record of the work that God has done among us. But for the reality of His saving grace, none of these materials would have been produced. And so they are a testimony to His glory. **Collection Development** Among the materials received at the Historical Center in 2020, I would especially mention: - L. Roy Taylor Manuscript Collection, 20 cu. ft. - Paul R. Gilchrist Manuscript Collection, 8 cu. ft., in addition to the existing collection. - Howard Theodore Cross [1923-2006] Manuscript Collection, [military chaplain], 4 cu. ft. - Thomas Mowbray [1850-1937] and Thomas Kay Mowbray [18901967] Manuscript Collection, [PCUS pastors], 0.5 cu. ft. - William Shirmer Barker II Manuscript Collection, 1 cu. ft., in addition to the existing collection. - Review of Presbytery Records, 5 cu. ft., consisting of Presbytery minutes from 2019. - Records of Pacific Northwest Presbytery, 18 cu. ft. **Research Library** A new online public access catalog (OPAC) was established [https://www.librarycat.org /lib/pcahc] in the first half of 2020, with an initial listing of about 1035 titles. This catalog runs on TinyCat, an adjunct of the LibraryThing software, and is subscription based. The first year’s subscription incurred a cost of $120.00 and with the addition of more titles, we will quickly move into a higher subscription tier (2000-5000 titles), at a cost of $240/year. Our initial subscription began in June of 2020, and my plan is to begin adding more titles to our catalog in June, such that we only incur that higher fee at renewal time. The Historical Center’s library holdings probably total about 5,000 titles, and it will take a good effort to log . It has been helpful to have the OPAC available online, and I trust others have found it helpful as well. We continue to add various works to the Center’s research library where they can be found and as funds allow, and some of the more interesting items added in 2020 include the following: - A complete set of _The Edinburgh Christian Instructor_, 1810-1837. From these issues, i prepared a …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
