# GA48 O29 — Add BCO Appendix of Investigation Suggestions

**Assembly:** 48th (2021)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 29 from Philadelphia Metro West Presbytery (to CCB, OC)

*Source: [ga48_2021 p. 1063](../markdown/ga48_2021.md#ga48-p1063)*

---

“Add _BCO_ Appendix of Investigation Suggestions” Amend the _Book of Church Order_ by the addition of a new Appendix (K), as follows (new text underlined). **APPENDIX K** **SUGGESTIONS FOR INVESTIGATIONS BY COURTS** **BEFORE PROCESS** **Introduction** 1. When reports of wrongdoing are brought to a court, _BCO_ 31-2 requires an “investigation” by the court to be performed “with due diligence and great discretion.” This Appendix offers practical suggestions for courts in how to conduct the steps of a _BCO_ 31-2 investigation before process and judgment. Reference is made to relevant _BCO_ passages to be considered and followed in each step of their investigation as they are applicable in any given case. 2. Please note: many churches have special policies for sexual abuse and molestation prevention and reporting. States also have certain required reporting regulations and, as a result, a separate civil investigation may be conducted which could coincide with an ecclesiastical investigation because of their separate spheres of authority. **-** **Step I** **Decide which Court Investigates and Which Members of the** **Court Participate:** **A. Which Court Investigates?** 1. Ordinarily and preferably the court of original jurisdiction - the Session for church members and the Presbytery for teaching elders ( _BCO_ 31-1; 15-1; 41-5); 2. The next higher court – when a lower court asks fora final disposition of a judicial matter referred ( _BCO_ 41-1, 3, 5); 3. The court within whose bounds an alleged offense was committed – when an alleged offense occurred at a distance, such court can investigate and determine if there are probable grounds for accusation, if necessary ( _BCO_ 32-9); 4. Presbytery – when a church Session refuses to act in doctrinal cases or instances of public scandal and two other Sessions of churches in the same Presbytery request the Presbytery of which the church is a member to assume original jurisdiction ( _BCO_ 33-1); or, – 5. General Assembly when a Presbytery refuses to act in doctrinal cases or cases of public scandal and two other Presbyteries request General Assembly to assume original jurisdiction ( _BCO_ 34-1; OMSJC 16.1-5). **B. Which Members Participate?** 1. Court as a Whole ( _BCO_ 15-3): a session or presbytery as a whole, may conduct investigation Steps II and III below. This is especially appropriate with smaller Sessions or Presbyteries. 2. Committee ( _BCO_ 15-1): The court may appoint a committee to conduct Investigation Steps II and III below on behalf of the court. According to _BCO_ 15-1, “a committee is appointed to examine, consider and report” back to the court, where there can be discussion, debate and a final decision. In more sensitive situations, there may be advantages to using a committee limited to two or three members. It protects the innocent or bruised and prevents unnecessary antagonizing of the accused and unnecessary division, anxiety and confusion in the court. This more careful approach would not necessarily apply to allegations of public offenses. 3. Judicial Commission ( _BCO_ 15-3): a presbytery may appoint a judicial commission to conduct investigation Steps II and III. Each commission shall have a minimum quorum of two teaching and two ruling elders ( _BCO_ 15-2). The Commission shall submit to Presbytery a full statement of its investigation and judgments rendered. “The Presbytery without debate shall approve or disapprove of the judgment, or may refer, (a debatable motion), any strictly constitutional issue(s) to a study committee. If Presbytery approves, the judgment of the commission shall be final and shall be entered on the minutes of Presbytery as the action. If Presbytery disapproves, it shall hear the case as a whole, or appoint a new commission to hear the case again.” ( _BCO_ 15-3). When _BCO_ 15-3 refers to “committing any judicial case to a commission” which shall “try the case”, the word “try” does not refer to just “trials,” (i.e. formal process as described in _BCO_ 32-2ff.) It can refer to other types of judicial cases as well. In the legal context, “try” can mean more broadly “to examine judicially” [from _Black’s_ _Law Dictionary Edition 2_ ]. Although investigations can be done by the court as a whole or by committee, in most cases it is better for Presbyteries to delegate this task to an ad hoc judicial commission, or preferably to a Standing Judicial Commission that could be established by the Presbytery to receive and investigate cases arising between Presbytery meetings. Standing Judicial Commissions may be empowered to investigate only or may also be authorized to conduct trials, appeals and complaints. Proposed reasons whether to institute process with possible trial are usually the result of an involved investigation where voluminous testimony and sensitive evidence must be weighed, discussed, and debated carefully over time. Such effort can more readily, and more appropriately, be delegated to a judicial commission appointed to do such work and to make its reports to Presbytery without debate ( _BCO_ 15-3). Not allowing debate is important because it: (1) protects against statements and objections that have not been informed by careful investigation and review; (2) saves time on the floor of Presbytery; and, (3) presumes trust in its commissioners to adjudicate wisely and justly, unless there is a clear error in its proposal, in which case the proposal could be voted down by presbytery as a whole, ora complaint could be made. **–** **Step II** **Conduct Initial Inquiry/Action** **A. Initial Inquiry:** 1. List reported alleged offenses and determine whether the alleged offenses are: a. Personal or general ( _BCO_ 29-2, 3), and if personal, “whether in the interest of religion” it should be dealt with as general ( _BCO_ 31-5). b. Private or public ( _BCO_ 29-4). 2. Aim to uphold the purposes of discipline ( _BCO_ 27-3) and to exhibit a Christ-like attitude of seriousness toward wrongdoing with humility and gentleness and seek to promote the same attitude in those investigated (Matt. 5:23-26; 7:1-5; Gal. 6:1; _BCO_ 32-1; 273,4). 3. Determine whether a humble and adequate attempt was made, by private means, to remedy a personal or general and private offense following the steps of Matt. 18:15-16, Lk. 17:3 or Gal. 6:1 ( _BCO_ 275 b and c; 31-5, 7; 32-1, 34-3). If the prior steps in _BCO_ 27-5 b and c required before admitting an allegation to court have not been followed in proper sequence, the court cannot admit the alleged offense for any further investigation until they are performed ( _BCO_ 27-5) nor proceed with process as in _BCO_ 32-2ff. In a way similar to _BCO_ 27-5 b and c, _BCO_ 34-3, says: “If anyone knows a minister to be guilty of a private offense, he should warn him in private. But if the offense be persisted in, or become public, he should bring the case to the attention of some other minister in the Presbytery. If it has not become “public,” i.e. “notorious” ( _BCO_ 29-4), then the “some other minister (singular) in the Presbytery” should also attempt to see that _BCO_ 27-5 c is followed (i.e. taking it to one or two others) before taking it to the court. 4. Consider appointing advisors (not necessarily court members) for both the defendant and the accuser(s) to be present when meeting with the parties involved ( _BCO_ 32-19). 5. Meet separately, when possible, with those making the allegation(s), the injured, any witnesses and the alleged offender(s) to obtain direct testimony regarding the allegations being made ( _BCO_ 31-2; 35-1, 2). 6. Determine whether an alleged offense, if assumed to be true and accurate in every respect, constitutes a chargeable offense: a. Shown to be an offense from Scripture according to the standards of the Constitution of the PCA ( _BCO_ Preface III; 29 1 to 4; 39 3, 3.1). b. Serious enough to warrant process or censure ( _BCO_ 34-5 to 7; _BCO_ 21-4.e, f; 21-5 Q 2; 24-6 Q 2) to maintain the ends of discipline ( _BCO_ 27-3). WLC Q151 lists numerous factors of seriousness under the general categories of: (i) persons offending, (ii) parties offended, (iii) the nature and quality of the offense, and (iv) circumstances of time and place. c. Whether in dealing with a more complex doctrinal or moral issue of a Constitutional nature, it should form a study committee or refer the matter to a higher court ( _BCO_ 15-3; 41-1ff). 7. Determine whether someone has come forward voluntarily and confessed a chargeable offense or has made such confession after initial inquiry into allegations ( _BCO_ 38-1; 31-7). **B. Initial Action** 1. After initial inquiry, when deemed appropriate or necessary, investigators should inform the Session or Presbytery of its findings and recommendations, before taking the initial action in this section IIB, unless the Session or Presbytery empowers the investigation committee or judicial commission to take such initial action or to proceed to Step III on its own. As stated in Step I.A.3, having a judicial commission investigate is usually better for a Presbytery in most cases and will be indicated by the reference “Presbytery judicial commission” in what follows below. In either case, final approval for any actions must be given by the Session or Presbytery as a whole ( _BCO_ 15-1 or 3). 2. Non-chargeable offenses are to be dismissed by the court without prejudice. 3. If the conciliatory steps in II.A.3 above have not been followed and one or both parties refuses or fails to take such steps after a reasonable time, unless the allegations have been otherwise appropriately withdrawn, the court should consider whether to bring accusations against them for: a. Disobeying Matt. 18:15 16; Lk. 17:3; and Gal. 6:1 by refusing to meet with the party, remaining unrepentant, or failing to guard against gossip or slander which undermines the honor of Christ, the peace, unity and purity of the church, and the reputation of the accused (WLC 143 145); or b Showing lack of forgiveness to the accused who has confessed fully and has adequately shown repentance (Matt. 18:21 35; Lk. 17:3-4; Col. 3:13; Matt. 5:22-26). 4. In light of testimony received, determine: - **a.** Whether to encourage a confession ( _BCO_ 31-7[b]) and/or; - **b.** In case of someone who has confessed to a chargeable offense, the following steps should be taken: (i) Discern if the confessor will permit the court (or Presbytery judicial commission) to use their confession to render judgment without formal process. If so, a full statement of the facts shall be approved by both the accused and the court before the court proceeds to judgment ( _BCO_ 38-1). It would be appropriate to suggest to the confessor that he obtain an advisor ( _BCO_ 32-19) to help guide him in this and the following steps ii.a c [below]. The court shall explain to the alleged offender (and his counsel) any special rules it has for how voluntary testimony given by the alleged offender can or will be use dina trial if process is initiated. The counsel can advise the alleged offender whether giving testimony during investigation is advisable, especially if it might result in the dismissal of the allegations. This may be particularly attractive if the alleged wrongdoer is seeking to vindicate his/her name before being subjected to trial ( _BCO_ 31-2). (ii) to approve a statement of facts, a court or Presbytery Commission should: (a) Meet with witnesses and/or injured parties to determine if there is any discrepancy between the confessor’s statement of facts and the testimony of witnesses and/or those injured. (b) After determining what changes might need to be made to have a more complete and accurate report, discuss this with the confessor and try to come to final agreement on the statement of facts. If mutual agreement is found on a statement of facts, the Session or Presbytery Commission shall meet in closed session. There it shall determine its judgment without process for the confessed offense along with …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
