# GA49 O15 — Amend BCO 7 to Disqualify from Office Men Identifying as Homosexual

**Assembly:** 49th (2022)  ·  **Source:** The minority recommends and moves that the General  ·  **Disposition:** Answered by reference

*Source: [ga49_2022 p. 128](../markdown/ga49_2022.md#ga49-p128)*

---

Assembly **answer Overture 15 in the affirmative as amended** . The amended text of the language to be inserted as new _BCO_ paragraph 7-4 would read as follows: 7-4. Men who describe themselves as homosexual, even those who describe themselves as homosexual and claim to practice celibacy by refraining from homosexual conduct, are disqualified from holding office in the Presbyterian Church in America. The amendments from the original overture 15 are shown below: 7-4. Men who ~~identify~~ describe themselves as homosexual, even those who ~~identify d~~ escribe themselves as homosexual and claim to practice celibacy ~~in that self-identification~~ by refraining from homosexual conduct, are disqualified from holding office in the Presbyterian Church in America. It is the church’s calling and stewardship to be a pillar and buttress of the truth (1 Tim 3:15). It is the “city set on a hill” whose light must not be hidden (Matt 5:14). Since 2018, the purity and peace of our church has been greatly disturbed by notions of Side B Christianity. For far longer, the culture’s increasing acceptance and celebration of homosexuality has arisen as a point of clear and obvious contrast. Many “call evil good and good evil”; they “put darkness for light and light for darkness” (Isa 5:20). Even many Christian denominations have joined in to celebrate that which displeases our Lord. Now, the question is before the Presbyterian Church in America. Members of our churches are asking for the denomination to take a stand on these issues, and this overture does so in a way that is clear and specific. **Why Overture 15 as Amended is Needed** We are encouraged and grateful for the work of the Overtures Committee in recommending Overture 29; however, there is a need for further action.

Whereas other statements (e.g., the AIC study report on human sexuality, Overture 29) have admirably defined the line, this overture draws the line. It responds to the risk of winning the exegetical and theological battle, but failing to put it in practice by giving a clear, constitutional standard of accountability. We as a denomination need to speak unambiguously on the question of personal holiness and the standards of belief and practice for officers. The minority believes this proposed amendment to the _BCO_ will do just that. This overture is Clear, Concise, and Relevant. _**Clear**_ Overture 15 as amended speaks with requisite clarity and specificity. This proposed _BCO_ amendment is short, and free from vague concepts or phrases. While the greater question of identity as being primarily a subjective notion of inner feelings and psychology rather than an outward one has caused confusion, the amendment to Overture 15 proposed by this minority report avoids that problem of subjectivity by removing references to identity and instead relying on self-description. This is an objective measure, and an officer or officer candidate can be evaluated based on his own written and oral statements. It also avoids questions of reputation which were concerns raised over the previous year. _**Concise**_ Overture 15 leaves no space for equivocation.

Whereas lengthy theological definitions can provide context and breadth, this overture states the issue succinctly and will enable efficiency and avoid the confusion that could arise from lengthier statements in our courts. _**Relevant**_ At this time, homosexuality is the particular sin and cultural hill on which the fight for gospel-holiness is pitched. Martin Luther reportedly stated, that “Though we be active in the battle, if we are not fighting where the battle is the hottest, we are traitors to the cause.” This, fathers and brothers, is where the battle is the hottest. It is right and appropriate to specifically discuss and address this sin. **Possible Objections** _**This arbitrarily targets particular sins**_ Objections have been raised that this overture inappropriately singles out a particular sin above others. In response to that, we say that in the place and time in which the Lord has placed the PCA in 2022, homosexuality is the particular sin and cultural touchpoint where the battle is joined. Our members and particularly our young people are under tremendous pressure in social, educational, and vocational settings to bow the knee to the homosexual agenda. The church needs to give constitutional authority to the clear and unequivocal proposition that a man who describes himself as a homosexual, is not qualified to church office. _**This is already addressed in our standards.**_ While we agree that our standards are clear on historic issues such as the sinfulness of homosexuality, recent innovations have caused confusion. In particular, the questions surrounding Side B Gay Christianity has caused much disruption. In addition, there are questions as to whether the standards are being appropriately applied. When an issue causes as much disruption to the peace and purity of the church such as this, it is right for us to clarify our constitution regarding how we are to respond. _**This unnecessarily narrows the BCO on contemporary issues**_ We should not be bound by the ideal of what constitutes “acceptable” constitutional language to the degree that the Church does not speak. _**Objection to placement in BCO 7**_ It may be argued that this amendment does not belong in _BCO_ 7. We disagree. As the title suggests, _BCO_ 7 addresses “general classifications” of church officers. Currently, the chapter enumerates three prohibitions regarding church office. _BCO_ 7-1 prohibits the continuation of revelatory gifts. _BCO_ 7-2 prohibits the ordination of women to the offices of elder or deacon. And, in a single sentence, _BCO_ 7-3, prohibits the usurpation of authority in church office. Each of these describes a categorical disqualifier that applies to all officers in the PCA. Therefore, it is fitting to amend _BCO_ 7 to include another single sentence prohibiting men who “describe themselves as homosexual” from serving in ordained office in the PCA. _**This is a “magic words” test**_ It has been suggested that this overture does nothing more than police language. This objection supposes that a man who struggles with same-sexattraction, who is pursuing holiness and mortifying his sin, could be disqualified from holding office in the church simply by describing his struggle with certain terminology. To the contrary, the “magic words” objection confuses the sign with the thing signified. It does not obtusely legislate _language_ but defines the standard. This overture clearly prescribes a standard of holiness for officers in the Lord’s Church. It serves as a clear and simple standard to complement the AIC study report on human sexuality and overtures 29 and 31, which are also coming before this assembly.

Whereas other statements and overtures speak to the underlying theology, overture 15 applies it. Instead of defining “the line”, overture 15 draws it. Moreover, the “magic words” objection betrays a low view of the competency of our courts. Presbyters have the capacity to work with an officer or candidate, to clarify, and to exercise sanctified discernment as to whether a man is speaking imprecisely or is truly disqualified due to his progress in sanctification. **Conclusion** This matter was a close question in the Overtures Committee. The motion to adopt the substitute to answer Overture 15 in the negative passed by a vote of 72-67. While we appreciate our brothers who seek unity in the church, we feel bound by our vow to promote the purity and peace of the church, and this overture does much to promote both. Now more than ever, the church needs Teaching Elders, Ruling Elders, and Deacons to lead and to speak. The church needs to give constitutional authority to the clear and unequivocal proposition that a man who describes himself as a homosexual is not qualified to church office. This overture will serve th8e peace, purity and faithful witness of the church. **SIGNED BY:** **TE/RE Name** **Presbytery** RE Matthew D. Fender James River TE Joe Cristman Chicago Metro TE David Barry South Florida RE Chad Cureton Fellowship RE Steve Dowling Southeast Alabama TE Rafael LaGuardia Gulf Coast RE Terry Carnes Eastern Pennsylvania TE Mark Herzer Eastern Pennsylvania TE William F. Hill, Jr. Iliana RE Mike M. McCary Gulf Coast TE Steven Warhurst Westminster TE David Gilbert Northwest Georgia RE Justen Ellis Northwest Georgia RE Charles Nave Blue Ridge TE Cory Colravy Central Carolina RE Bradley J. Chwastyk Chesapeake TE Garry Vanderveen Canada West RE Paul Mandry Canada West RE Dan Lyzenga Chicago Metro TE Jim McCarthy Grace TE Jason Anderson Fellowship TE Kreg Bryan Central Georgia RE Jay Strickland Central Georgia TE Michael Brock Evangel RE Andrew Rutherford Palmetto TE Richard Harris Houston Metro RE Ed Jordan Southwest Florida RE James W. Ressler Susquehanna Valley TE Andy Aikens Tennessee Valley Presbytery TE Vincent Wood Susquehanna Valley RE Blake Pool Siouxlands RE John B. Leaf Rocky Mountain RE Drew Ricketts Evangel TE John A. Van Devender Chesapeake TE Colin Andrade Iowa TE Ted Trefsgar New Jersey RE Mike Levenhagen Suncoast Florida TE Matt Wood North Texas TE Jordan Gallo Pee Dee RE Keith Phillips Iliana RE Daniel Witcher Westminster TE Brent Lauder Suncoast Florida RE Greg Miseyko South Florida RE Ken Wynne Houston Metro RE David Walters Jr Lowcountry RE William Cheek North Florida

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
