# GA51 O1 — Amend BCO 35-1 and 35-8 Regarding Witness Eligibility

**Assembly:** 51st (2024)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 1 from Piedmont Triad Presbytery (to CCB, OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered in the negative  ·  **BCO:** 35-1, 35-8

*Source: [ga51_2024 p. 1055](../markdown/ga51_2024.md#ga51-p1055)*

---

Original Overture #1: Vacated by the Presbytery Current Overture #1: “Amend _BCO_ 35-1 and 35-8 Regarding Witness Eligibility” [Editorial Note: This overture is similar issue to Overture 18 but proposes an alternative amendment.]

**Be it resolved** : That _BCO_ 35-1 and 35-8 be amended by deleting some current language (indicated below by ~~strikethrough~~ ) and adding some new language (indicated below by underlining). 35-1. ~~All persons of proper age and intelligence are competent~~ ~~witnesses, except such as do not believe in the existence of God,~~ ~~or a future state of rewards and punishments.~~ Any person who swears or promises to testify truthfully ( _BCO_ 35-8) can be called as a witness. Either party has the right to ~~challenge~~ object to a witness ~~whom he believes to be incompetent~~, and the court shall consider and rule on the objection ~~examine and decide upon his~~ ~~competency.~~ _No changes to BCO 35-2 through 35-7_ 35-8. ~~The oath or affirmation to a witness shall~~ ~~then be~~ ~~administered by the Moderator in the following or like terms:~~ The court shall inform the witness that, regardless of whether he believes in God or in a future state of rewards and punishments, his oath or promise is made in the presence of God and God will judge him on the truthfulness of his answers. The Moderator shall then ask the witness the following: Do you solemnly swear ~~promise,~~ in the presence of God, that you will declare the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, according to the best of your knowledge in the matter in which you are called to witness, as you shall answer it to the great Judge of the living and the dead? If, however, the witness cannot take an oath either for conscientious reasons or because he is not a Christian and thus not able to take a lawful oath invoking God, the Moderator shall then ask the witness the following: ~~at any~~ ~~time a witness should present himself before a court, who~~ ~~for conscientious reasons prefers to swear or affirm in any~~ ~~other manner, he should be allowed to do so.~~ Do you solemnly promise that you will declare the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, according to the best of your knowledge in the matter in which you are called to witness? Such that the final text reads: 35-1. Any person who swears or promises to testify truthfully ( _BCO_ 35-8) can be called as a witness. Either party has the right to object to a witness, and the court shall consider and rule on the objection. 35-8. The court shall inform the witness that, regardless of whether he believes in God or in a future state of rewards and punishments, his oath or promise is made in the presence of God and God will judge him on the truthfulness of his answers. The Moderator shall then ask the witness the following: Do you solemnly swear, in the presence of God, that you will declare the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, according to the best of your knowledge in the matter in which you are called to witness, as you shall answer it to the great Judge of the living and the dead? If, however, the witness cannot take an oath either for conscientious reasons or because he is not a Christian and thus not able to take a lawful oath invoking God, the Moderator shall then ask the witness the following: Do you solemnly promise that you will declare the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, according to the best of your knowledge in the matter in which you are called to witness? **Proposed Text of** _**BCO**_ **35-1 through 35-8** For context and clarity, the following is the full proposed text of _BCO_ 35-1 through 35-8. Note that this text includes the two changes to _BCO_ 35 approved and enacted by the 50 [th] General Assembly. 35-1. _**(If revised)**_ Any person who swears or promises to testify truthfully ( _BCO_ 35-8) can be called as a witness. Either party has the right to object to a witness, and the court shall consider and rule on the objection. 35-2. _(No change)_ The accused party is allowed, but shall not be compelled, to testify; but the accuser shall be required to testify, on the demand of the accused. A husband or wife shall not be compelled to bear testimony against one another in any court. 35-3. _(No change)_ A court may, at the request of either party, or at its own initiative, make reasonable accommodation to prevent inperson contact with the accused: - **a.** The court may have testimony taken by videoconference. The videoconference shall employ technical means that ensure that all persons participating in the meeting can see and hear each other at the same time, and which allows for live crossexamination by both parties. - **b.** The court may restrict the accused from appearing on the videoconference screen, and when the accused is represented by counsel ( _BCO_ 32-19), crossexamination shall be conducted by that counsel. - **c.** In all cases where such accommodation has been made, videoconference testimony by witnesses under the age of 18 shall be taken by written interrogatory to be read to the witness by a person appointed by the court in accordance with the applicable provisions of _BCO_ 3511. d. The court shall include in the record of the proceedings its reasons for this accommodation and any objection from either party. 35-4. _(No change)_ The testimony of more than one witness shall be necessary in order to establish any charge; yet, if in addition to the testimony of one witness, corroborative evidence be produced, the offense may be considered proved. 35-5 _. (No change)_ It belongs to the court to judge the degree of credibility to be attached to all evidence. 35-6 _. (No change)_ no witness afterwards to be examined, unless a member of the court, shall be present during the examination of another witness on the same case, if either party object. 35-7. _(No change)_ Witnesses shall be examined first by the party introducing them; then cross-examined by the opposite party; after which a member of the court, or either party, may put additional interrogatories. No question shall be put or answered except by permission of the moderator, subject to an appeal to the court. The court shall not permit questions frivolous or irrelevant to the charge at issue. 35-8. _**(If revised)**_ The court shall inform the witness that, regardless of whether he believes in God or in a future state of rewards and punishments, his oath or promise is made in the presence of God and God will judge him on the truthfulness of his answers. The Moderator shall then ask the witness the following: Do you solemnly swear, in the presence of God, that you will declare the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, according to the best of your knowledge in the matter in which you are called to witness, as you shall answer it to the great Judge of the living and the dead? If, however, the witness cannot take an oath either for conscientious reasons or because he is not a Christian and thus not able to take a lawful oath invoking God, the Moderator shall then ask the witness the following: Do you solemnly promise that you will declare the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, according to the best of your knowledge in the matter in which you are called to witness? **Rationale** This Overture proposes to amend Chapter 35 of the _Book of Church Order_ by revising the criteria for witness eligibility to allow persons professing no supernatural belief as witnesses in cases of process. Currently, _BCO_ 35-1 disqualifies as witnesses persons “who do not believe in the existence of God, or a future state of rewards and punishments.” The proposed amendments would expand witness eligibility such that persons who do not believe in God or a future state of rewards and punishments are permitted to act as witnesses in cases of process and to offer their testimony to the courts of the church. The Overture also revises the instructions of _BCO_ 35-8 regarding the oath or promise witnesses shall make. Summary of what the proposed amendment does, and does not, do. 1. The amendment expands witness eligibility and permits church courts to hear the testimony of persons who are willing to affirm the revised oath or promise in _BCO_ 35-8. 2. The amendment retains a party’s right to object to the admittance of any witness. 3. The amendment requires the court to inform every witness, regardless of his individual beliefs, that his oath or promise is made in the presence of God and that God will judge him on the truthfulness of his answers. 4. The amendment retains and clarifies the exemplary oath for Christian witnesses while introducing an exemplary promise that is applicable to Christians who for conscientious reasons prefer not to swear an oath, non-Christian theists, and atheists. 5. The amendment _does not_ require the court to permit any person to testify as a witness. Only witnesses who swear or promise that they will testify truthfully are permitted to be considered as witnesses. If either party objects to the admittance of a witness, the court shall consider and rule on the objection. 6. The amendment _does not_ require the court to attach the same degree of credibility to the testimony of every witness (cf. _BCO_ 31-8; 35-5). 7. The amendment _does not_ require the court to administer an oath to any witness for whom an oath to God would be unlawful (cf. _WCF_ 22.2) or a violation of conscience. **Further Explanation and Responses to Objections** The current restriction of _BCO_ 35-1 is properly understood as a product of the context of Christendom that dominated for centuries in the West. There was an extended time in the West when belief in God generally and belief in the Christian faith particularly were so widespread that even those outside of the church could be presumed to be theists of some sort, and the absence of such belief in an individual signaled an unusually significant philosophical and moral deviation from societal norms. In this context of common theistic belief, restrictions against non-theist witnesses did not severely curtail the church’s capacity to receive the judicial testimony of outsiders in her courts. This is no longer the case in the rapidly secularizing modern world. In our current postChristendom cultural milieu, functional naturalism is no longer an exceptional anomaly, and those outside of the church who might possess valuable testimony for her courts are increasingly likely to formally profess no belief in God or a future state of rewards and punishments. The proposed amendment revises witness eligibility requirements in recognition of the sweeping and profound cultural shifts that have taken place in recent decades in order that our courts are not unduly restrained in their pursuit of truth and justice. The Westminster Standards make abundantly clear that there are many ways that falsehood may corrupt the life, witness, integrity, and justice of Christ’s church. Of course, overt lies may come in from the outside. But falsehood may also take root if, internally, the church sets up obstacles to her unfettered pursuit of the truth. _Westminster Larger Catechism_ 144–145 state that, beyond merely avoiding bearing false testimony, the ninth commandment enjoins Christians actively to “the preserving and promoting of truth” and that it prohibits “concealing the truth, undue silence in a just cause, and holding our peace when iniquity calleth for either a reproof from ourselves, or complaint to others” or otherwise acting “to the prejudice of truth or justice.” What is more, the command calls us to “a charitable esteem of our neighbors,” including our atheist neighbors, which at very least means that we ought to charitably entertain the possibility that our neighbors who bear the image of God are by common grace capable of telling the truth about grave matters. The notion that non-theists, in the absence of the threat of immediate punishment, ought never to be …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
