# GA52 O22 — Amend BCO 20-3, 24-3 & 25-1 to Clarify Regular Standing re Minimum Voting Age

**Assembly:** 52nd (2025)  ·  **Source:** OVERTURE 22 from the Pacific Northwest Presbytery (to CCB, OC)  ·  **Disposition:** Answered in the negative  ·  **BCO:** 20-3, 24-3, 25-1

*Source: [ga52_2025 p. 1208](../markdown/ga52_2025.md#ga52-p1208)*

---

“Amend _BCO_ 20-3, 24-3 and 25-1 to clarify "Regular Standing" re minimum voting age” **A.**

**Be it resolved** that _BCO_ 20-3, 24-3, and _BCO_ 25-1 be amended as shown below. Proposed additions are indicated by underlining. 20-3. when a congregation is convened for the election of a pastor ... All communing members in good and regular standing, but no others, are entitled to vote in the churches to which they are respectively attached. (cf. _BCO_ 25-1) 24-3. All communing members in good and regular standing, but no others, are entitled to vote in the election of church officers in the churches to which they respectively belong. A majority vote of those present is required for election. (cf. _BCO_ 25-1) 25-1. The congregation consists of all the communing members of a particular church, and they only are entitled to vote. A congregation may establish a rule setting a minimum voting age (regular standing), but it must be adopted by a two-thirds (2/3) majority at a congregational meeting that is called with at least 30 days' notice. (cf. _BCO_ 20-3, 24-3) **B.** **Be it also resolved** that if GA adopts this, or an amended version, the Stated Clerk will make this full Rationale available when the Amendment Ballot is sent to Presbyteries. **Rationale** - The need for this Overture arises from an SJC Decision in March 2024, where, by a vote of 15-5, the SJC ruled that the _BCO_ does not permit a congregation to set a minimum voting age. [7] This Overture seeks to permit such. It argues that such has historically been common in American Presbyterianism. It's part of what was, and is, meant by "regular" standing. The _Psiaki_ Decision did not define what the word "regular" means in the phrase "good and regular standing" and this Overture seeks to treat it as it has historically been understood. When the PCA was formed in 1973 it adopted the PCUS _BCO_ of 1925. Minor communicants did not vote in 1925, as they were not regarded as being in "regular" standing. Our _BCO_ 25-1 and 24-3 remain unchanged from 1925. The sentence above in _BCO_ 20-3 remains unchanged from the PCUS _BCO_ of 1879. [ 8] This Overture’s rationale provides many and varied arguments for why the PCA should allow such freedom, which is generally described below in Robert's Rules. Some organized societies define additional classes of "membership" that do not entail all of these rights. Whenever the term member is used in this book [RONR], it refers to full participating membership in the assembly, unless otherwise specified. Such members are also described as "voting members" when it is necessary to make a distinction. (RONR (12th ed.) 1:4) 7 Case 2023-11: _Complaint of Psiaki v. Pacific Northwest_ ( _M51GA_, p. 877). This included the SJC Decision, a Concurring Opinion, three Dissenting Opinions, and an Objection (34 pages total). https://drive.google.com/file/d/1o6nAccxzIkLBHVNlL_v7d_A7YDPyURK/view?usp=sharing 8 _**BCO**_ **20-3 = PCUS 1879, VI, §3-4.** _**BCO**_ **24-3 = PCUS 1925, XXVI, §145.** _BCO_ 25-1 = **PCUS 1925, XXVII, §152. The 1879 PCUS Book used "all communicants"** **instead of "all communing members" for the provision in** _**BCO**_ **20-3.** **https://www.pcahistory.org/bco/index.html** If this Amendment is enacted, _no church_ will be required to change _any_ current practice. It simply adds an option for churches that believe a minimum voting age is prudent. Further, while enactment might increase the average age of minors who vote, it should not have any effect on the average age when covenant children are admitted to the Lord's Supper (unless a Session is unreasonably delaying communion until a child has the maturity to vote.) In the pages that follow are many reasons why this Overture should be adopted. 1. Scripture and the “DEA” 11. PCA Polity Differences 2. Good and "Regular" Standing 12. De Facto Minimum Age 3. PCUS Allowance for Voting Age 13. Church Corporations 4. 1982 Reception of RPCES 14. _BCO_ Preliminary Principle 6 5. 2024 _Psiaki v. Pacific NW_ 15. Other Voting Restrictions? 6. No Conflict with BCO 6-4 16. No Change to Pby/GA Representation 7. Common Grace & Societal Rules 17. No Change to Judicial Rights 8. Status Quo 18. Related Considerations 9. 1996-1997 Strong Support 19. Further Reading 10. 2000 Pittsburgh Overture As one considers these many arguments, it's important to understand that disagreement with some does not invalidate the persuasive power of the others. **1. Scripture and the "Discernment Equivalency Assertion"** Some maintain that if a child has the discernment necessary to be admitted to the Lord's Supper, he thereby has the discernment necessary to vote on _any_ church matter (i.e., what we'll call the Discernment Equivalency Assertion or DEA). However, this view lacks advocacy among the churchmen most responsible for developing Presbyterian polity. [9] These consistently find 9 Alexander T. McGill, _Church Government: A Treatise_ (Philadelphia, PA: Presbyterian Board of Publication, 1888), 127-136. Cf., Samuel Rutherford, _Due Right of Presbyteries_ (London: Printed by E. Griffin for Richard Whittaker and Andrew Crook), 38-39, 201, 204. George Gillespie, George Gillespie, _Miscellaneous Questions_ (Edinburgh: Gedeon Lithgow, 1649), 24. Thomas Smyth, _Manual for the Use of the Members of the Second Presbyterian Church,_ _Charleston_ (Jenkins & Hussey, 1838), 104-107, 121. William Cunningham, _Discussions on_ rational and Scriptural grounds for limiting church suffrage to communicants with adult maturity, self-sovereignty, and ability to commit and contribute to the local church. a. _Adult Understanding_ —Jesus tells us that minors can, at some point prior to adulthood, make a genuine profession of faith in Him (Matt. 18:6; Mk. 9:42). And yet in the same breath He warns His disciples that believing minors are especially capable of being led astray, as they retain a particular degree of naivety. Although they might be sufficiently discerning to partake of sacramental meals (Ex. 12:26-32; Lk. 2:41-47), their relative lack of wisdom requires that they remain under the unique tutelage and discipline of parents (Gen. 18:19; Deut. 6:7; Prov. 22:6; Eph. 6:4). Thus, _BCO_ 28-1 affirms that even after becoming communicants, “the spiritual nurture, instruction and training of the children of the Church are committed by God primarily to their parents.” Prov. 22:15 Folly is bound up in the heart of a child, but the rod of discipline drives it far from him. (ESV here and below.) Prov. 29:15 The rod and reproof give wisdom, but a child left to himself brings shame to his mother. 1 Cor. 13:11 when i was a child, i spoke like a child, I thought like a child, i reasoned like a child. when i became a man, I gave up childish ways. 1 Cor. 14:20 Brothers, do not be children in your thinking. Be infants in evil, but in your thinking be mature. To discern that a prospective church officer possesses careful discretion; courage to take difficult stands; excellent household management skills; empathy to comfort the downcast; etc. may, in the wise judgment of a church, require greater understanding than belongs to minors. Most would probably also agree there is a difference between the ability of children to understand the Gospel ( _BCO_ 57-2) and their ability to understand things _Church Principles: Popish, Erastian, Presbyterian_ (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1863), 290-291. Stuart Robinson & Thomas E. Peck, “What are the Constituent Elements of the Church of God, as Organized and Visible?” in _The Presbyterial Critic and Monthly Review_, Dec 1855, 566-573. Charles Hodge, “Who May Vote in the Election of Pastor,” in _The Church and Its_ _Polity_ (New York: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1879), 244-246. like church debt, elder qualification, dissolution of TE/RE calls, and denominational affiliation. Some have, nevertheless, argued that if minors are qualified to make the most consequential life-decision of receiving Christ as Savior, they are necessarily qualified to make decisions of lesser consequence, such as choosing church officers. [10] This line of reasoning entails a _non sequitur_ . The _positive consequences_ of accepting Jesus Christ are surely greater than that involved in choosing a particular man for office. The former procures eternal life, the latter a particular officer fora limited season. However, the potentially _negative ramifications_ of selecting an officer are always greater than those involved in accepting Christ as Lord.

Whereas Christ cannot sin against His church (2 Cor. 5:21; Heb. 4:15), officers can.

Whereas Christ cannot prevaricate, would-be officers can. Hence, it requires a greater level of discernment to decipher the character of the latter than the former (Matt. 7:15ff.; 24:24; 2 Cor. 11:3-4, 13-15; 1 Thess. 5:19-21; 1 John 4:1ff.; 2 Pet. 2:1ff.; Rev. 13:11). Analogously, even though admission to the Lord’s Supper and right to marry must both follow reaching “years of discretion” ( _BCO_ 28-3; 54-1), none suppose that the age at which one may be communed is identical with that at which he may enter into a marriage covenant. The _BCO_ recognizes that the “age and intelligence” necessary to testify in a church court may be greater than that necessary to participate in the Lord’s Supper: 35-1. All persons of _proper age_ and intelligence are competent witnesses, except such as do not believe in the existence of God, or a future state of rewards and punishments. Either party has the right to challenge a witness whom he believes to be incompetent, and the court shall examine and decide upon his competency. b. _Adult Self-Sovereignty_ —The demands of the Fifth Commandment (Ex. 20:12; Deut. 5:16; Lev. 19:3; Matt. 15:4; 19:19; Eph. 6:2-4) supply strong 10 Morton Smith, for example, understood PCA _BCO_ 24-3 to confer suffrage to minor communicants, and he suggests as its likely rationale something along these lines. Smith, _Commentary on the PCA Book of Church Order_ (Taylors, SC: Presbyterian Press, 2007), 257. However, the original (1879) authors of the language retained in _BCO_ 24-3 do not correlate the understanding necessary to be communed with that necessary to vote in congregational meetings. grounds for doubting the propriety of minors voting in church meetings. The specific nature and degree to which minors are required to submit to parents renders it questionable that they may assert their voting rights against parental prohibitions or exercise them in contradiction to how parents instruct them vote. It is reasonable, therefore, for congregations to limit voting to adults, with a view to neither (a) encouraging minors to influence their church independently of parental guidance; nor (b) effectively granting parents the ability to wield multiple votes, by requiring their minors to second their perspective in all matters. Of course, minors may continue to exert an influence on congregational decisions in consultation with parents by whom they are well-represented. Notably, a communing minor's lack of independence has also been recognized in judicial cases. In Case 2002-5: _Plowman v. Philadelphia_, a Session declared a mother automatically contumacious for "refusing to force" her 14 and 16-year-old communing daughters to testify at trial "even though they had been duly cited by the Session." The Session suspended the mother from the sacraments, but did not censure the communing minors for failing to obey the citation. ( _BCO_ 35-14) [11] _BCO_ 35-3 was revised in 2023 to provide an option to treat minors differently than adults when testifying, even if the minor is a communing member and even if not a victim: 35-3. A court may, at the request of either party, or at its own initiative, make reasonable accommodation to prevent inperson contact with the accused: ... (c.) In all cases where such accommodation has been made, videoconference testimony by witnesses under the age of 18 shall be taken by written interrogatory to be read to the witness by a …

---

[← Overture catalogue](../index/OVERTURES.md)
