# Case 1982-05 — complaint of the session of the peace Congregation, Cary, North Carolina, against the Presbytery of

**Court:** CJB  ·  **Assembly:** 10th (1982)  ·  **Disposition:** rescinded  ·  **BCO cited:**  31-5 27-5 31-7 34-1 32-9 

*Source: [ga10_1982 p. 59](../markdown/ga10_1982.md)*

---

- **b.** He did make personal, but public, accusations against the person and ministry of TE Steve Joseph Wilkins;
- **c.** He did accuse Grace Presbytery of wrongdoing in relation to the existence and actions of the Ellisville Administrative Commission; and
- **d.** He did violate the spirit, if not the letter, of his ordination vows in advising the members of the Ellisville Presbyterian Church of the alternative of separating their congregation from the Presbyterian Church in America.

2. TE Billy G. Combs, Chairman of the Ellisville Administrative Commission, did write two letters, dated December 23, 1980, and January 16, 1981, to TE G. Aiken Taylor in which Mr. Combs did attempt in the spirit of I Timothy 5:1 to call attention to the errors of Dr. Taylor, thereby fulfilling the requirements of BCO 27-5 and 31-5.

- **a.** Grace Presbytery, at its Stated Meeting on January 9, 1981, approved the letter of December 23, 1980, as a part of the report of the Ellisville Administrative Commission.
- **b.** Grace Presbytery, at its Stated Meeting of January 9, 1981, directed the Chairman of the Ellisville Administrative Commission to write one more letter to TE G. Aiken Taylor, the letter of January 16, 1981.

3. When process is instituted by a Church court (see BCO 31-5), it is not necessary to follow BCO 27-5 (see BCO 31-7).
4. Whereas Grace Presbytery did not and cannot institute process in the matter of the alleged offenses of TE G. Aiken Taylor because he is a member of Western Carolinas Presbytery (see BCO 34-1), it would be the responsibility of Western Carolinas Presbytery to fulfill the requirement of BCO 31-7, if it is deemed wise “to send a committee to converse … with the offender …”
5. Grace Presbytery acted properly in accordance with BCO 32-9, at its Stated Meeting of May 8, 1981, in notifying Western Carolinas Presbytery of the alleged offenses of TE G. Aiken Taylor.
6. Western Carolinas Presbytery has not followed the requirement of BCO 32-9 in that it did not “at once proceed against the accused.”

Signed: TE VAUGHN E. HATHAWAY, JR.
TE GEORGE G. FELTON, SR.
TE JOHN S. RAGLAND
TE WILLIAM H. SMITH

Adjudicated §10-79, p. 109.

Case 5: Complaint of the Session of the Peace Congregation, Cary, North Carolina, against the Presbytery of Eastern Carolina

We, the undersigned, the Session of Peace Presbyterian Church (Cary, NC), hereby complain against a decision of Eastern Carolina Presbytery. Our complaint is:

That at its stated meeting, May 22, 1982, Eastern Carolina Presbytery refused to rescind a resolution which we believe goes beyond Scripture in defining the Christian lifestyle and which, therefore, is contrary to the Westminster Confession of Faith, Chapter 20-2, which forbids binding the conscience by the commands of men. The resolution, adopted January 26, 27, 1979, concludes:

“Eastern Carolina Presbytery affirms its considered opinion voluntary total abstinence from the use of all alcoholic beverages is the proper life style for a Christian today. The Presbytery, therefore, calls upon its Teaching and Ruling Elders to adhere to this position in their personal practice, and calls upon its Sessions to encourage the members of their churches to adhere to this position in their personal practice.” (Minutes of Presbytery, Jan. 26, 27, 1979, pp. 4,5, #29—See Document A)

The inconsistency of this resolution with Scripture and with the decisions of the 7th and 8th General Assemblies were presented in our letter to the Sessions of Presbytery requesting that the resolution be rescinded (document B).

In evaluating this complaint, we believe General Assembly should keep in mind that it was this Presbytery which overturned the General Assembly twice on this matter. Following the clear statement of the 8th Assembly that it would be improper to adopt a statement for total abstinence, Presbytery appointed a special study committee which recommended rescinding the resolution. That motion lost (Minutes of Presbytery, May 23, 1981, p. 4, #26—See document C) as did the latest one by our Session.

We respectfully request General Assembly to correct Eastern Carolina Presbytery on this issue, on which they have repeatedly refused to correct themselves.

Session, Peace Presbyterian Church
JAMES K. WORKMAN, TE
JAMES S. BUS, RE
MARVIN D. HUISMAN, RE
DANIEL J. PRINS, RE
JOSEPH C. HAMMOND, RE

Adjudicated §10-79, p. 109.

Case 6: The Session and Moderator, First Presbyterian Church, Stanley, North Carolina, against Central Carolina Presbytery

Fathers and Brethren of the Tenth General Assembly:

We have filed with the Presbytery of Central Carolina the attached letter of complaints.

We understand that a called meeting of our Presbytery will be called for the morning of June 14, 1982, at Grand Rapids to rescind what we believe were improper actions taken at its May 22, 1982, meeting: i.e. (1) Refusing to hear or consider properly filed complaints as per BCO 43-1 against the New Life Session and its Moderator; (2) Allowing persons to vote on the question of hearing the complaint who were involved in the complaint, their votes causing the complaint not to be heard, BCO 39-2; (3) Calling for executive session where those who have filed the complaints are barred from the hearings; (4) Allowing an elder to vote whose right to vote is in question by the Presbytery and under consideration by the General Assembly (the request for a ruling on the right of an elder emeritus to have full voting privileges in courts) and other complaints as are spelled out in attached complaints; (5) Improper interpretation of BCO 11-3; (6) Failure of New Life Session and Moderator to follow rightly BCO 27-5 and 46-5.

In the event the Presbytery of Central Carolina at its June 14, 1982 does not rescind its improper actions of May 22, 1982, and take immediate steps to correct any and all actions which have made it necessary to file these complaints and requests.

Signed: RE TED SMITH, MODERATOR
RE RONNIE L. MILLER, CLERK

Adjudicated §10-79, p. 111.

## 10-13 Personal Resolutions

Personal Resolution #1 from TE David Gillespie, which had previously been printed, was referred to the Committee of Commissioners on Judicial Business. (See §10-12, p. 52 for text, and §10-75, p. 106 for response.)

Personal Resolution #2 from TE David R. Dively was introduced as new business and referred to the Committee of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations. (See §10-12, p. 52 for text, and §10-24, p. 62 and 10-53, p. 77 for response.)

## 10-14 New Churches

The Stated Clerk announced the following churches which had been added to the denomination since the last General Assembly:

|  PRESBYTERY | NAME | CITY | DATE  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  Ascension | Covenant | Chicago, IL | 5/23/82  |
|   |  Middlesex | Butler, PA | 11/29/81  |
|   |  South Hills | Pittsburgh, PA | 1/10/82  |
|   |  Great Lakes Comm. | Jenison, MI | 3/7/82  |
|   |  Ch. of the Saviour | Williamsville, NY | 4/18/82  |
|  Calvary | McGregor | Irmo, SC | 9/13/81  |
|   |  Fellowship | Greer, SC | 12/13/81  |
|   |  McCutchen Memorial | Monarch, SC | 4/12/82  |
|  Central Carolina | Christ Covenant | Matthews, NC | 12/5/81  |
|  Central Georgia | Dayspring | Forsyth, GA | 4/25/82  |
|  Covenant | First | Clarksdale, MS | 3/9/82  |
|  Eastern Carolina | White Oak | Freemont, NC | 10/11/81  |
|   |  New Covenant | Raleigh, NC | 2/14/82  |
|  Evangel | Reformed Heritage | Birmingham, AL | 11/17/81  |
|   |  Presbyterian East | Birmingham, AL | 11/27/81  |
|   |  First | Dothan, AL | 6/8/82  |
|   |  Trinity | Dothan, AL | 6/8/82  |
|   |  Third | Birmingham, AL | 6/8/82  |
|  Louisiana | Plains | Zachary, LA | 10/10/81  |
|  Mid-Atlantic | Aisquith | Baltimore, MD | 6/28/81  |
|   |  New Life | Virginia Beach, VA | 10/18/81  |
|  North Georgia | Westminster | Gainesville, GA | 10/17/81  |
|   |  Cherokee | Woodstock, GA | 1/13/82  |
|  Pacific | Covenant | Atascadero, CA | 3/21/82  |

|  PRESBYTERY | NAME | CITY | DATE  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  Philadelphia | Village | Moorestown, NJ | 11/15/81  |
|   | Faggs Manor | Cochranville, PA | 2/18/82  |
|  Siouxlands | West Friesland | Ackley, IA | 1/19/82  |
|   | Faith | Ackley, IA | 1/19/82  |
|  Southern Florida | West Boca Raton | W. Boca Raton, FL | 8/10/81  |
|   | North Dade | North Miami, FL | 5/9/82  |
|   | Redlands Comm. | Redlands, FL | 3/7/82  |
|  Southwest | Hope | Mesa, AZ | 11/1/81  |
|   | Calvin | Phoenix, AZ | 2/21/82  |
|  Tennessee Valley | East Ridge | Chattanooga, TN | 11/17/81  |
|   | Lakeview | Rossville, GA | 1/26/82  |
|   | Lookout Mountain | Lookout Mt., TN | 1/31/82  |
|   | Grace | Peoria, IL | 5/23/82  |
|   | Kirk-of-the-Hills | St. Louis, MO | 5/16/82  |
|  Western Carolinas | Faith | Morganton, NC | 1/4/81  |
|   | Providence | Murphy, NC | 2/28/82  |
|   | Malvern Hills | Asheville, NC | 2/14/82  |
|   | Arden | Arden, NC | 4/25/82  |
|   | Dillingham | Barnardsville, NC | 1/26/82  |
|   | First | Weaverville, NC | 2/7/82  |
|  Westminster | Faith | Johnson City, TN | 4/18/82  |
|   | Memorial | Elizabethton, TN | 6/6/82  |

## 10-15 Recess

On motion the Assembly voted to recess, and the session was concluded with prayer by TE Donald J. MacNair at 5:15 p.m.

## MINUTES TUESDAY MORNING

June 15, 1982

### Second Session

## 10-16 Assembly Reconvened

The Assembly reconvened at 8:50 a.m. with the singing of “Zion Stands with Hills Surrounded” and prayer by the Moderator. The Assembly’s Nominating Committee was excused to meet.

## 10-17 Approval of Minutes

The minutes of the first session were read and approved as corrected.

## 10-18 Program of Committee for Christian Education and Publications

TE Paul D. Kooistra introduced the program presentation of the CE/P Committee. The program included a dramatic hyperbole by RE Donald DeHart, a film entitled “Commission and Commitment”, and remarks regarding Great Commission Publications by TE David H. Bryson.

## 10-19 Committee on Thanks

The Moderator appointed the following to the Committee on Thanks: TE Frank Smick, Jr., Convener, TE Harold Borchert, TE H. Timothy Fortner, and RE Stuart Patterson.

## 10-20 Commissioner Orientation

The Stated Clerk and the Assistant Parliamentarian, W. Jack Williamson, addressed the commissioners briefly giving information on Assembly rules and operations.

## 10-21 Personal Resolution #3

Personal Resolution #3 from TE Richard Fraser and TE William B. Leonard requesting advice from the Permanent Sub-committee on Judicial Business was received and referred to that Sub-committee. (See §10-12, p. 53 for text, and §10-53, p. 77 for the response to this request.)

## 10-22 Committee of Commissioners on Judicial Business

RE John Thompson, Chairman of the Committee of Commissioners on Judicial Business, led the Assembly in prayer and presented a partial report of the Committee.

Recommendations:

1. That the Complaint of Stephen M. Lee, et al., against Gulf Coast Presbytery (Case #1, p. 54) be found in order, and that a Judicial Commission be appointed to adjudicate the case at this General Assembly. We nominate the following as the members of that Commission:

|  Teaching Elders | Presbytery  |
| --- | --- |
|  William Barker | St. Louis  |
|  Egon Middelman | St. Louis  |
|  Michael Schneider | Mississippi Valley  |
|  David Gillespie | Calvary  |
|  Robert Vincent | Louisiana  |
|  Harold Borchert, Convener | Mid-Atlantic  |
|  John Sanderson | St. Louis  |
|  Ken Counts | Louisiana  |
|  Ruling Elders |   |
|  David Moon | Southwest  |
|  Robert E. Lane | Westminster  |
|  Harold Tolsma | Texas  |
|  Robert Blaylock | Louisiana  |
|  Robbie Peal | North Georgia  |
|  William Joseph, Sr. | Evangel  |
|  Lanny Moore | Calvary  |
|  Steve Fox | Evangel  |
|  Alternates |   |
|  George Coxhead | Covenant  |
|  Grover Gunn | Covenant  |
|  William Smith | Grace  |

Adopted

## 10-23 Constitutional Advice

TE Vaughn E. Hathaway, Jr., Chairman of the Permanent Sub-Committee on Judicial Business, led in prayer and presented the following report on the judicial question in regard to MtW cooperative agreements, which was carried over from the Ninth General Assembly (M9GA, 9-69, p. 143):

The Sub-Committee on Judicial Business recommends the adoption of the following response:

At the Ninth General Assembly, the Permanent Sub-Committee on Judicial Business was asked to respond to the question whether or not the Committee of Commissioners has to make a recommendation concerning the new cooperative agreements of the Permanent Committee on Mission to the World.

In order to answer the question, the Permanent Sub-Committee on Judicial Business took notice of the following points:

1) BCO 14-1-5 states that the General Assembly has the responsibility “to evaluate needs and resources.”

2) BCO 14-1-7 states: “The Assembly’s committees are to serve and not to direct any Church judicatories. They are not to establish policy, but rather execute policy established by the General Assembly.”

3) BCO 14-6 states that the General Assembly has the power “to institute and superintend the agencies in the general work of evangelization.” The actions and activities of all the committees are always subject to the review of the General Assembly.

4) Church courts have final responsibility in determining doctrinal compatibility (see BCO 12-5, 13-8, and 14-6). Each new cooperative agreement requires the acceptance of a doctrinal statement.

5) The Committee of Commissioners is not envisioned in our system of government as serving as a commission but as a channel by which business is reviewed and brought to the floor for final action by the General Assembly (see RAO 8-1; M8GA, p. 239; and BCO 15-1).

Thus, it is the opinion of the Sub-Committee on Judicial Business that the Committee of Commissioners must make a recommendation to the General Assembly regarding each new cooperative agreement of the Committee on Mission to the World.

Adopted

# 10-24 Report of the Committee of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations

TE David H. Jussely, Chairman of the Committee of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations, led the Assembly in prayer, and then presented the Committee's report.

#### I. Business Referred to the Committee:

A. Minutes

1. Ad-Interim Committee on Joining and Receiving
2. Sub-Committee on Interchurch Relations
3. Seventh Meeting of the NAPARC

B. Reports and Recommendations

1. Sub-Committee on Interchurch Relations (Appendix D, p. 211)
2. Ad-Interim Committee (p. 320) See p. 322 for the Report of the PCA Presbytery votes on Joining and Receiving and Presbytery boundary changes.
3. Sub-Committee on Judicial Matters of the Committee on Administration (p. 323)

C. Communications

1. Korean American Presbyterian Church
2. Korean Presbyterian Church in Korea
3. World Alliance of Reformed Churches

#### II. Major Issues Discussed:

A. Procedures dealing with joining and receiving.
B. Relationship with OPC
C. Relationship with ARP

#### III. Recommendations:

1. That the Minutes of the Permanent Sub-Committee on Interchurch Relations of August 14, 1981; September 26, 1981; and January 12, 1982, be approved.

Adopted

2. That the Minutes of the Ad-Interim Committee on June 16, 1981; July 15, 1981; December 10, 1981; and February 25, 1982, be approved. Adopted
3. That Dr. Francis Schaeffer be invited to address the Tenth General Assembly as the key-note speaker for the Joining and Receiving; Adopted in §10-2, p. 19
4. That all matters related to the continuing process of effecting one church be referred to the appropriate committees or agencies of the General Assembly; Adopted
5. That the following form be used for joining and receiving RPCES Corporations if such takes place:

Now, Therefore, the presbyteries of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod have become a part of the presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in America. The boards and agencies of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod, are received by the appropriate committees and agencies of the Presbyterian Church in America.

A. Corporations: The Presbyterian Church in America will determine that these corporations shall be active:

"Presbyterian Church in America (a Corporation)", a corporation of the State of Delaware; "Presbyterian Church in America Foundation, Inc.", a corporation of the State of Georgia; "Reformed Presbyterian Foundation," a Missouri corporation; "Ridge Haven, Inc.", a North Carolina corporation; "Covenant College", a corporation of the State of Missouri domesticated under the laws of the State of Georgia; "Covenant Theological Seminary", a corporation of the State of Missouri.

These corporations shall be merged into and become a part of the **Presbyterian
Church in America (a Corporation)"’: ‘Christian Training, Inc.’*, a Delaware
corporation; **World Presbyterian Missions, Inc."’, a Delaware corporation, **National Presbyterian Missions, Inc.’’, a Delaware corporation; *‘Board of Home
Ministries’*, a Michigan corporation; and **Reformed Presbyterian Church, Evangelical Synod", a corporation of the State of Pennsylvania; the RPCES Pension Fund,
an Illinois Corporation.
B. Board of Directors: The Committee on Administration of the Presbyterian Church in America shall serve as the Board of Directors of the corporations to be merged
into the ‘Presbyterian Church in America (A Corporation)"’ for the purpose of
accomplishing the mergers and winding up the affairs of each corporation, seeing to
it that all duties, commitments, responsibilities and obligations, fiduciary and
otherwise, of the various corporations are strictly observed.
C. The Reformed Presbyterian Foundation: The **‘Reformed Presbyterian Foundation’’ shall be merged into and become a part of ‘Presbyterian Church in America
Foundation, Inc."’, as rapidly as facts and circumstances permit. The Trustees of
the Reformed Presbyterian Foundation, elected as provided in the bylaws of the
corporation and placed in classes for specific term of years, and the Board of Directors
of the Presbyterian Church in America Foundation, Inc. elected by the General Assembly shall constitute the Board of Directors of the Reformed Presbyterian
Foundation during the interim period. Any rule of the PCA, which might prevent a
trustee of the Reformed Presbyterian Foundation from serving as a member of the
Board of Directors/ Trustees of the Reformed Presbyterian Foundation, ora sa member
of the Board of the PCA Foundation, Inc., is suspended for a period of two years.
D. Covenant College and Covenant Theological Seminary: These educational
institutions are authorized to operate and to be governed pursuant to their newly
amended bylaws and/or articles of incorporation during the coming year, and the
Committee on Administration is directed to prepare amendments to the bylaws of
the General Assembly of the PCA to conform to the new bylaws and/or articles of
incorporation of these institutions. Adopted
6. That presbyteries newly formed according to the plan of Joining and Receiving be
directed to meet as soon as possible to be reconstituted, and that the Stated Clerk of
each presbytery serve as convener (or if no PCA churches or ministers are involved,
the Moderator shall designate a Convener). Adopted
(See §10-34, p. 71 for coveners appointed. )
7. That all the records of former RPCES presbyteries be closed as of the date of reconstitution. Adopted
8. That future relations with the OPC be referred to the Permanent Committee on
Interchurch Relations and that the General Assembly ask the presbyteries to consent
to an invitation by the Eleventh General Assembly, if the way be clear, to the OPC to
effect and perfect one church under the Constitution of the PCA. (Deferred for a
report on the constitutionality of this motion by the permanent Sub-Committee on
Judicial Business, The report was adopted in §10-53, p. 77.
Recommendation 8 was then divided on line two after the word ‘‘Relations.’’ The
Jirst part of the motion was adopted as follows, and the remaining part was defeated. )
That future relations with the OPC be referred to the Permanent Committee on Interchurch Relations. Adopted
9. That Covenant Seminary be the repository for RPCES presbytery and synod records
and other historical materials until such time as permanent arrangements can be made.
Adopted
10. That all records of RPCES Committees and Boards be deposited at Covenant Seminary until such time as permanent arrangements can be made. Adopted
11. That the Ad-Interim Committee on Joining and Receiving . . . be dismissed with
the General Assembly's deepest appreciation for their labors, and all continuing

matters related to fraternal relations with other denominations be referred to the Permanent Committee on Interchurch Relations. Adopted

12A. That the General Assembly approve the reception of the Korean American Presbyterian Church into the membership of the North American Presbyterian and Reformed Council. Adopted
12B. That the General Assembly approve the reception of the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church into membership in the North American Presbyterian and Reformed Council (NAPARC). Defeated
13. That the General Assembly express its desire to enter into fraternal relations with the Korean American Presbyterian Church; and that the Sub-Committee on Interchurch Relations be authorized to appoint two Fraternal Delegates to the up-coming meeting of the General Assembly of that Church. (It is understood that these Fraternal Delegates will be in the area at the time of this meeting, thus minimizing expenses.) Adopted
14. In the matter of fraternal relations with the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America makes the following affirmations:

- **a)** We recognize that it is possible for Christians and for judicatories to say and do things that offend other Christian brethren; and we acknowledge that offenses against Christian brethren do occur and have occurred that affect the testimony of the Church before the watching world.
- **b)** We reaffirm our commitment to fraternal relations with the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church. Adopted

15. That the General Assembly acknowledge the courtesy of the invitation from the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, to be represented with an observer at the General Council in Ottawa in August, but that in the light of the fact that the Presbyterian Church in America continues at this time to perfect its ecclesiastical relationships, we decline this invitation with thanks for its having been extended. Adopted
16. That the Committee on Administration, as soon as possible, develop an Assemblywide Sunday of Recognition in order to engage simultaneously the people of the churches in celebration of the enlarging of the church through "joining and receiving". (Clerk's note: The Committee on Administration designated the first Sunday of October, 1982, as the date for this celebration.) Adopted
17. That the Tenth General Assembly instruct its Sub-Committee on Interchurch Relations to investigate recent developments in the Christian Reformed Church with respect to the widely reported controversies involving questions of the authority of Scripture within the CRC, and report to the Eleventh General Assembly as to what effect, if any, these developments should have on future relations with the CRC. Adopted
18. That the report as a whole be adopted. Adopted

Respectfully submitted,

DAVID JUSSELY, CHAIRMAN

DON POST, JR., SECRETARY

Roll of Committee of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations

|  Presbytery | Commissioner  |
| --- | --- |
|  Ascension | TE Frank D. Moser  |
|  Calvary | RE Walter Anderson  |
|  Covenant | TE Mike Sartelle  |
|  Eastern Carolina | RE Daniel Prins  |
|  Grace | TE William H. Smith  |
|  Mid-Atlantic | TE Steve Schoof  |
|  Mississippi Valley | TE David Jussely  |
|  New River | TE Don Post, Jr.  |
|  North Georgia | TE Bob Valentine  |

|  Presbytery | Commissioner  |
| --- | --- |
|  Philadelphia | RE Thomas Maher  |
|  Siouxlands | TE Jack Mayfield  |
|  Southwest | TE Gerrit DeYoung  |
|  Warrior | TE Tom Kay  |
|  Westminster | TE James A. Jones  |

(Clerk’s Note: Recommendations 12b-15 were adopted at later times, §10-27, §10-54, p. 77. They are included here for easier reference.)

## 10-25 Recess

The order of the day of lunch was called, and the Assembly recessed with prayer by RE John Spencer at 12:10 p.m. Included in the prayer was a request by TE Carl R. Bradley, Jr., TE David R. Bransby, and RE Robert Taylor for prayer for TE Paul A. Doepke of Chatsworth, California, a PCA pastor and father of four young children, who has been stricken with lymphoma and leukemia.

# MINUTES—TUESDAY AFTERNOON

June 15, 1982

## Third Session

## 10-26 Assembly Reconvened

TE David H. Linden led the Assembly in prayer as it reconvened at 1:30 p.m.

## 10-27 Report of the Committee of Commissioners on Interchurch Relations

The Assembly returned to consideration of the report on Interchurch Relations. Recommendations 12B - 15 were adopted here. (See §10-24, p. 63.)

## 10-28 Fraternal Delegates

The Moderator, the Rev. Ik Kwan Lee, and the General Secretary, the Rev. Samuel Chang, of the Korean American Presbyterian Church were introduced to the Assembly and seated as visiting brethren.

## 10-29 Personal Resolutions

Personal resolutions #4 and #5 were introduced and referred to the Committees of Commissioners on Bills and Overtures and Mission to the World respectively. (See §10-12, p. 53 for the texts, and §10-42, p. 72)

## 10-30 Program of the Board of Trustees on Insurance, Annuity and Relief Funds

The Board of Trustees for the Insurance, Annuity and Relief Funds were granted a special order of the day to show a film on the work of the Board.

## 10-31 Report of the Committee of Commissioners on Christian Education and Publications

TE Morse D. UpDeGraff, Chairman of the Committee of Commissioners on Christian Education and Publications, led the Assembly in prayer and presented the report.

#### I. Business Referred to the Committee

A. Report of the Permanent Committee (Appendix B, p. 165).

B. Overture #8 from the Presbytery of Mississippi Valley (§10-12, p. 51).

C. The Minutes of June 15, 1981; August 28, 1981; December 4-5, 1981; March 5-6, 1982, of the Permanent Committee.

D. The Audit Report for the year ending December 31, 1981.

E. Business carried over from previous General Assemblies.

#### II. Major Issues Discussed:

A. Business referred in I.

B. The pressing financial needs and problems of the Committee and alternative solutions.

#### III. Recommendations:

1. That the Minutes for June 15, 1981; August 28, 1981; December 4-5, 1981; and March 5-6, 1982, be approved with notations. Adopted

2. That the Assembly approve both the purpose statement of the Permanent Committee, which says, “Our defined purpose is to serve as a resource to the courts and congregations of the PCA by providing the training, curricula and publications necessary to develop skills needed in their work of evangelism and the equipping of the saints to serve God and each other in all of life throughout the world”, and the manner in which we have applied that purpose as reflected in I-V of our report. Adopted

3. That the proposed 1983 budget and the amended 1982 budget be approved, as presented by the Permanent Sub-Committee on Stewardship Ministries. Adopted with Stewardship Report

4. That the Coordinator and his staff be thanked for their diligent and effective work in the area of Christian Education and Publications. Adopted

5. That the Rev. Charles H. Dunahoo be reelected Coordinator for CE/P for the next year. Adopted

6. That in light of the reception of the RPCES, the Assembly reaffirm its support for that part of the “joining and receiving” plan approved by the Ninth General Assembly which specifies that Covenant College will report directly to the Assembly through its own Committee of Commissioners. Adopted

7. That in light of the reception of the RPCES, the Assembly reaffirm its support for that part of the “joining and receiving” plan approved by the Ninth General Assembly which specifies that Covenant Theological Seminary will report directly to the Assembly through its own Committee of Commissioners; and further, that the Assembly reaffirm the responsibility of CE/P to oversee and coordinate the denomination’s program for theological training, particularly through support of the Certification Committee. Adopted

8. That the ministers and local churches be encouraged to continue to take advantage of the training offered at the annual PCA Minister’s Continuing Education Conference. Adopted

9. That the presbyteries be encouraged to establish and finance their own regional continuing education program for ministers, utilizing the resources and personnel from CE/P for this training. Adopted

10. That each presbytery be reminded of the constitutional requirement for an Assembly-approved program of theological education for each person entering training after June, 1981, and that the presbytery plan be submitted to the Certification Committee for approval by January 1, 1983. Adopted

11. That due to the rapidly rising cost of printing and mailing, the CE/P Committee be authorized to explore and implement alternatives for financing the publication and distribution of the denominational magazine, The PCA Messenger. Adopted

12. That in light of the defined purpose of the Messenger in its attempt to present the whole news of the PCA, prayer is requested on behalf of the committee and staff for this essential ministry. Adopted

13. That the WIC throughout the church be thanked for their support of the 1981 Love Gift to CE/P. Adopted

14. That the 1983 WIC Love Gift project for MtW be designated for an audiovisual presentation for radio station HCJB in Quito, Ecuador. Adopted

15. That the responsibility for all diaconal ministries, except overseas relief, be placed under the MUS Committee and that the CE/P Committee continue to offer assistance in the area of training and materials needed for that ministry. Adopted

16. That the PCA Family Conference be postponed until the summer of 1983. Adopted

17. That the Assembly approve and support by encouraging attendance at the Senior High Conference at Ridge Haven, jointly sponsored by CE/P and Calvary Presbytery, July 26-31, 1982, and that the Assembly recommend the National Reformed Presbyterian Youth Leadership Conference at Horn Creek, Colorado, June 26 - July 3, and that there be a

continued development of our camps and youth ministry within the denomination at large.
*Adopted*

18. That the General Assembly designate October 31, 1982, as Christian Education Sunday.
*Adopted*

19. That Overture 8 (§10-12, p. 51) be answered in the negative.
*Adopted*

20. That the business carried over from previous Assemblies (§10-12, p. 51) is answered in the Christian Education Permanent Committee’s report, paragraphs IV, E and IV, B, respectively.
*Adopted*

21. That the report as a whole be adopted.
*Adopted*

Respectfully submitted,
MORSE UPDEGRAFF, CHAIRMAN
JOHN S. McNICOLL, SECRETARY

## Roll of Committee of Commissioners present:

|  Central Carolina | TE Eulice Thomas  |
| --- | --- |
|  Central Florida | RE James Steele  |
|  Central Georgia | RE Julian Davis  |
|  Eastern Carolina | RE Gene Parks  |
|  Evangel | RE William Lanier  |
|  Grace | TE John Ragland  |
|  Gulf Coast | RE Charles Phillips  |
|  Louisiana | RE Robert Blaylock  |
|  Mississippi Valley | TE Douglas Murphy  |
|  North Georgia | TE Terry Mercer  |
|  Pacific | RE Don Hale  |
|  Philadelphia | RE George Harris  |
|  Siouxlands | TE David Dupee  |
|  Southern Florida | RE Jackson Sells  |
|  Texas | TE John McNicoll  |
|  Warrior | TE Dennis Nolan  |
|  Westminster | TE Morse UpDeGraff  |

## 10-32 Appointment of the Judicial Commissions

RE John Thompson, Chairman of the Committee of Commissioners on Judicial Business, led the Assembly in prayer and presented a partial report as follows:

**Recommendations:**

2. That the Complaint of T.E. Charles H. Davis, (et al.), against the Presbytery of Central Georgia (Case #2, p. 55), and the Complaint of T.E. David H. Bryson, et al., against the Presbytery of Central Georgia (Case #3, p. 56) be found in order; they be combined and one (1) Judicial Commission be appointed to adjudicate these cases at this General Assembly. We nominate the following as members of that Commission:

|  Teaching Elders | Presbytery  |
| --- | --- |
|  George Knight | St. Louis  |
|  Henry Johnson | Westminster  |
|  Alan Story | Evangel  |
|  Joseph Morecraft | North Georgia  |
|  Bruce Garris | Warrior  |
|  Paul Alexander | Evangel  |
|  Wallace Tinsley | Calvary  |
|  Ruling Elders | Presbytery  |
|  Andrew Belz | Tennessee Valley  |
|  Richard Chewning | Mid-Atlantic  |
|  Thomas McCallie | Tennessee Valley  |

James Davis
Louisiana
William Stevenson
North Georgia
William Montgomery
Southwest
Leland Sayers
Tennessee Valley
Donald Long
New Jersey

Alternates
William C. Hughes
Mississippi Valley
Carl Smith
Central Florida

Adopted

3. That the Complaint of Vaughn E. Hathaway, Jr., et al., against Grace Presbytery (Case #4, p. 56) be found in order, and that a Judicial Commission be appointed to adjudicate the case at this General Assembly. We nominate the following as members of this Commission:

Teaching Elders
Presbytery
Joseph Pipa
Texas
Wayne Herring
Mississippi Valley
Paul Settle
Calvary
Charles Green
Central Florida
K. W. Hurst
Evangel
John Pickett
Puget Sound
Bernard Kuiper
Southwest
John Q. Hall, Convener
Westminster

Ruling Elders
Thurman Raines
Westminster
Joseph Hall
St. Louis
Michael Hodgkinson
Central Florida
Elwood Bass
Southwest
Earl Fleming
Ascension
Allen Long
Louisiana
Charles Clayton
Mississippi Valley
Howard Lane
Great Lakes
Robert Miller
New River
Russell Doig
Delmarva

Alternates
Don K. Clements
Mid-Atlantic
Edwin Elliott, Sr.
Mid-Atlantic

Adopted

4. That the Complaint of the Session of the Peace Congregation, Cary, North Carolina, against the Presbytery of Eastern Carolina, (Case #5, p. 57) be found in order, and that a Judicial Commission be appointed to adjudicate the case at this General Assembly. We move that the following be constituted a Judicial Commission.

Teaching Elders
Presbytery
Charles Anderson
Tennessee Valley
James Bowen, Convener
Southern Florida
Shelton Sanford
Grace
Woody Markert
Tennessee Valley
Chester Lanious
Louisiana
Donald Munson
Western Carolinas
Joseph Harrell
Evangel
John DeBardeleben
Philadelphia

**Ruling Elders**
William Coggins Southern Florida
Murdock Campbell Gulf Coast
Hank Terrill Westminster
Carl Fickling Pacific
Walter Myers Southwest
George Fox Ascension
William Gordy Evangel

**Alternates**
Charles Colclasure Calvary
Stewart Miller Westminster
Dewitt Smiley Grace

*Adopted*

## 10-33 Report of the Committee of Commissioners on Administration

The report of the Committee of Commissioners on Administration was presented by the Chairman, RE John Pascalis, who began with prayer.

### I. Business Referred to the Committee:

A. Minutes of the Committee on Administration:
June 15, 1981; July 21, 1981; September 24, 1981; November 6-7, 1981; (Sub-Committee) December 11, 1981; February 12, 1982; April 16, 1982; May 28, 1982.

B. Minutes of the Board of Directors:
June 15, 1981; November 7, 1981; February 12, 1982 (Appendix L, p. 311).

C. Report and Recommendations of the Committee on Administration. (Appendix A, p. 130)

D. Overture #9 from Siouxlands Presbytery (§10-12, p. 42).

E. Business Carried over from Previous Assemblies (§10-12, p. 50)

F. Audit Report on Committee on Administration.

### II. Major Issues Discussed:

A. Possible reconstitution of Committee on Administration.

B. The desirability of General Assembly Permanent Committees utilizing “Executive Committees”.

C. Rationale on centralization location of General Assembly Committee offices.

D. The subject of delegated Assemblies.

E. The subject of pages at meetings of General Assembly.

F. The subject of General Assembly oversight of Insurance and Annuities Committee.

### III. Recommendations:

1. That the Committee on Administration Minutes of June 15, 1981; July 21, 1981; September 24, 1981; November 6-7, 1981; December 11, 1981 (Sub-Committee); February 12, 1982; April 16, 1982; May 28, 1982, be approved.
*Adopted*

2. That the Eleventh General Assembly be held at Tidewater, Virginia, unless a cheaper site can be found, on June 13-17, 1983, with Committees of Commissioners beginning on June 11, 1983, or as called by the respective conveners.
*Adopted*

3. That the Assembly direct the Sub-Committee on Judicial Business to frame a bylaw to allow Committees, Boards and Agencies of the Assembly to use Executive Committees, providing for a full review and approval of all actions of the Executive Committees, and for the submission of Executive Committee minutes to the Committee of Commissioners for review along with the minutes of the full Committee, Board or Agency. Further, that if the Committee on Administration approves the proposed language of the Sub-Committee, the proposal may be put into effect immediately pending final approval by the next General Assembly.

All Committees, Boards or Agencies of the Assembly, upon receipt of the proposed bylaw change for the Assembly, shall prepare amendments to their respective Manuals or Bylaws to bring them into conformity with the Assembly’s Bylaw proposal, if they desire to use Executive Committees. In the meanwhile, Executive Committees should not be used by Assembly Agencies.
*Adopted*

4. That the Stated Clerk be employed through the 1983 General Assembly. Adopted
5. That the Assembly approve relocating the Business Administrator's office to the same city as the Computer Center, and thus the same city as many of the Committees of the General Assembly. Adopted
6. That if the Stated Clerk's office is not able to publish the Digest of the Minutes during the calendar year of 1982, the special allocation of $10,000.00 be carried over in the 1983 budget. Adopted
7. That the budget of the Committee on Administration as presented through the Stewardship Committee be approved. Adopted with the Stewardship Report §10-90, III, 10, p. 115.
8. That the Stated Clerk be directed to visit the offices of each of the Assembly's Boards and Agencies to determine how each is preserving its historical materials, and to report to the next Assembly as to the status of the historical records of the various agencies of the Assembly. Adopted
9. That the following amendment to the Rules For Assembly Operations be enacted: Add new 8-17 as follows:

## 8-17 Review of Presbytery Minutes

Each Presbytery Clerk is to provide the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly with three copies of all the presbytery minutes that are to be reviewed sixty (60) days prior to the opening of the Assembly. The Clerk, in consultation with the Convener of the Committee of Commissioners on Review and Control of Presbyteries, is to distribute copies of the minutes to members of the Committee no later than thirty (30) days prior to the opening of the Assembly. The members of the Committee are to read the minutes assigned to them and be prepared to report at the time of the meeting of the Committee of Commissioners. The Stated Clerks of Presbyteries or their representatives are to be prepared to meet with the Committee of Commissioners to answer questions, and to clarify any discrepancies possible. The Committee shall report these matters, which are not satisfactorily clarified, or in which it appears a Presbytery has failed to comply fully with the Constitution of the Church. Adopted in §10-100, IV, p. 125.

10. That, as a result of "joining and receiving" the Stated Clerk be authorized to meet in regional meetings with stated clerks of the newly formed presbyteries to assist them in an orderly transition into the PCA. Adopted
11. That the General Assembly reappoint the CPA firm of Kent, Nobles, and Martin to conduct audit of the 1982 records. (Note; Postponed and adopted in connection with MtW Report) Adopted
12. That hereafter, the Minutes of the General Assembly not be distributed free of charge to ministers, clerks of sessions, etc., but be sold at prices set by the office of the Stated Clerk. Rationale: prices may fluctuate. Adopted
13. That hereafter, the Yearbook of the PCA not be distributed free of charge to ministers, clerks of sessions, etc., but be sold at prices set by the office of the Stated Clerk. Rationale: prices may fluctuate. Adopted
14. That the Committee on Administration be authorized to continue to study the matter of delegated Assemblies. Adopted
15. That the General Assembly approve locating the offices of the Assembly's Committees in one geographical location. Rationale: The Assembly has the right to determine whether or not there will be a centralized location, and likewise to make the selection of the location (if desired). Adopted
16. That the permanent location be recommitted to COA for further study. Rationale: prerogative of the Assembly to make the determination. Adopted
17. That the General Assembly direct the Board of Trustees on Insurance and Annuities to have Mr. James Hughes examined by the Theological Examining Committee (See §10-95, p. 121) Adopted
18. That the sentence in Article IV, Section #11 of the General Assembly Bylaws of the PCA reading, "The Trustees shall not be subject to the control or direction of any other committee or organization of the Corporation" be referred to the Committee on Administration for study in consultation with the Board of Trustees of Insurance and Annuity, to be reported back to the Eleventh General Assembly. Adopted

19. That the General Assembly grant permission to the COA to appoint an interim coordinator subject to the approved examination by the Assembly’s Theological Examining Committee.
Adopted

20. That the General Assembly authorize the Permanent Sub-Committee on Stewardship Ministries, in consultation with each Permanent Committee of the General Assembly, to continue to review and evaluate the Assembly organizational structure and interrelationships of the permanent committees; identify areas of duplication and ambiguity in committee assignments and responsibilities; suggest appropriate revisions; and report the same to the Eleventh General Assembly.
That the Stewardship Sub-Committee be permitted to use consultants or advisors outside of the memberships of the permanent committees in accomplishing this; that necessary expenses beyond the cost of regular committee meetings be shared equally by the four permanent committees.
Adopted

21. That Overture #9 (§10-12, p. 42) from Siouxlands Presbytery be answered by Recommendation #14.
Adopted

22. That 9-80, III, 2, carried over from the Ninth General Assembly, concerning pages at meetings of the Assembly, be answered in the negative.
Rationale: Cost to the Assembly; same COA Recommendation #14, was defeated and deleted in committee by vote of 12-O.
Adopted

23. That 9-80, III, 6, carried over from the Ninth General Assembly, concerning Assembly organizational structure, be answered by referring to Recommendation #20.
Adopted

24. That 9-80, III, 7, carried over from the Ninth General Assembly, concerning delegated Assemblies, be answered by referring to Recommendation #14.
Adopted

25. That 9-80, III, 14, carried over from the Ninth General Assembly, concerning a single geographical location for Assembly committee offices, be answered by referring to Recommendation #15.
Adopted

26. That 9-50, III, 17 carried over from the Ninth General Assembly, concerning the use of “executive committees” to conduct permanent committee business, be answered by referring to Recommendation #3.
Adopted

27. That 9-55, III, 3, carried over from the Ninth General Assembly, concerning coordination of computer operations, be answered by referring to Recommendation #5.
Adopted

28. That the Minutes of the Board of Directors of June 15, 1981, November 7, 1981, and February 12, 1982, be approved.
Adopted

29. That the Assembly Arrangements Committee, and particularly those who share the responsibility of preparing the Assembly’s Docket, be instructed to give special attention to a rearrangement of the 1983 Docket in order to allow doctrine, polity and judicial matters, as well as budgets, to be handled earlier on the docket, and that the Committee of Commissioners on Judicial Business meet an extra day early, if necessary.
Adopted

30. That the expenses of pages at this General Assembly for food and lodging be paid by the Committee on Administration for those who are unable to pay their own way, to be funded from the four Committees.
Adopted

31. That the report as a whole be received.
Adopted

Respectfully submitted,
RE JOHN PASCALIS, CHAIRMAN
TE TOM SULLIVAN, SECRETARY

Roll of Committee of Commissioners present:

|  Teaching Elders | Presbytery  |
| --- | --- |
|  Marvin Camp | Siouxlands  |
|  Tom Graham | Mid-Atlantic  |
|  Michael Rogers | Ascension  |
|  Shelton Sanford | Grace  |
|  Dan Sulc | Western Carolinas  |
|  Tom Sullivan | Westminster  |

Ruling Elders
James Barnett
Carry Carpenters
A. L. Hughes
George Moss
John Pascalis
Tom McCallie

Calvary
Central Carolina
Gulf Coast
Evangel
Southern Florida
Tennessee Valley

(Clerk’s note: Some items were handled at later times during the Assembly. The whole report has been included here for easier reference.)

## 10-34 Conveners of New Presbyteries Appointed

The Moderator announced the appointment of the following conveners for new Presbyteries resulting from the “joining and receiving”:

Eastern Canada
Great Lakes
Illiana
Northeast
New Jersey
Oklahoma
Puget Sound
St. Louis

TE Thomas Aicken
TE Wm. A. Shell
TE Thomas Waldecker
TE Wm. S. Henderson
TE James A. Smith
TE Paul DeLong
TE Robert A. Bonner
TE Albert F. Moginot, Jr.

## 10-35 Request for Reconsideration

TE G. Aiken Taylor requested the brethren give thought to their previous action regarding the application of the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church for membership in NAPARC, in view of certain developments occurring at their current General Synod.

## 10-36 Recess

The Assembly recessed at 5:10 p.m., being led in prayer by TE Billy Combs.

# MINUTES—TUESDAY EVENING
## Fourth Session
June 15, 1982

### 10-37 Assembly Reconvened

The Assembly was reconvened at 7:30 p.m. with prayer by TE Nelson K. Malkus.

### 10-38 Communication of Thanks

TE Henry J. Mueller read to the Assembly Communication #3 from the Presbytery of the Gulf Coast, expressing thanks to the Presbyteries and Churches of the PCA for responding to their appeal on the behalf of the Westminster Presbyterian Church of Milton, Florida. (See §10-12, p. 40)

### 10-39 Report of the Committee of Commissioners on Administration Continued

The Assembly returned to the report of the Committee of Commissioners on Administration and adopted Recommendations #2 as amended, and Recommendations #18-29. (See §10-33, p. 68.)

### 10-40 Resolution of Thanks for Dan M. Moore

TE Gordon K. Reed presented the following Resolution of Thanks for the retiring Business Administrator, Dan M. Moore, which was received by a standing vote and ordered spread upon the Minutes:

## A RESOLUTION OF APPRECIATION FOR DR. DAN M. MOORE

Whereas, God’s faithful servant, Dan Moore, was called by the First General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America to be the Coordinator for the Committee on Administration; and

Whereas, He has served in that same capacity for nine years always giving full measure of service, and far more; and

Whereas, The Presbyterian Church in America has been blessed by his leadership throughout our formative years; and

Whereas, Dan Moore has been a friend and counselor to many ruling and teaching elders in this denomination, and a winsome representative in our relationships with other branches of the Church; and

Whereas, He has maintained a godly and consistent testimony among us, doing justly, loving mercy and walking humbly before our God; and

Whereas, Our Lord Jesus Christ, King and Head of His Church, has called him to other labors within the Kingdom;

Therefore, be it resolved that the Presbyterian Church in America, meeting in its Tenth GA at Grand Rapids, Michigan, on this 15th day of June, 1982, does hereby express its gratitude to our Sovereign Lord for raising up His servant Dan Moore for such a time as this in the birth and life of our denomination. And be it further resolved, that we express our appreciation to our beloved brother for his ministry to and for us in all these years, and that we assure him of our love and prayers in his future ministry that our Lord may prosper him in the work to which he has been called.

## 10-41 Partial Report of the Committee of Commissioners on Judicial Business

A partial report of the Committee of Commissioners on Judicial Business was presented by the Chairman, RE John Thompson.

**Recommendation:**

5. That the Complaint of the Session of the First Presbyterian Church, Stanley, North Carolina, against Central Carolina Presbytery be found in order, and that a Judicial Commission be appointed to adjudicate the case at this General Assembly. We nominate the following as the members of that Commission:

|  **Teaching Elders** | **Presbytery**  |
| --- | --- |
|  Joe Easterling | Central Florida  |
|  Joe Sullivan, Convener | Westminster  |
|  Wayne Curles | Central Georgia  |
|  Beryl Hubbard | Delmarva  |
|  Tom Ramsay | Pacific  |
|  Peter Stanzen | Ascension  |
|  Don Post | New River  |
|  Jim Midbury | Mid-Atlantic  |
|  **Ruling Elders** |   |
|  Gene Parks | Eastern Carolina  |
|  Burton Holmes | Ascension  |
|  Ken Kulmer | Southern Florida  |
|  E. L. Caston | Grace  |
|  Richard Post | Gulf Coast  |
|  C. M. Burchfield | Tennessee Valley  |
|  Maurice McPhee | Puget Sound  |
|  **Alternates** |   |
|  Richard Teague | Warrior  |

Adopted

## 10-42 Personal Resolution #6

Personal Resolution #6 was presented by RE James F. Sowell and referred to the Committee of

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
