# Case 1997-04 — Conrad v. Central Carolina. [ M26G (1998): 122]. Not sustained 21-0 — Summary: Alleged S erred by removing her and others from membership roll. Issue: Did the Central Carolina Presbytery act unconstitutionally on January 25-26, 1997, in denying the complaint of July 22, 1996? Judgment: No. The CCP d

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 26th (1998)  ·  **Disposition:** not_sustained  ·  **Vote:** 21-0  ·  **BCO cited:**  43-1 31-7 42-9 32-4 35-1 35-5 

*Source: [ga26_1998 pp. 130–132](../markdown/ga26_1998.md)*

---

We agree with certain basic principles stated and inferred from these strong
arguments. We believe that a presbytery, under the general powers of BCO §13-9a, has
the right to determine its membership of teaching elders, to control the order and
decorum of its meeting, to issue instructions and orders to its members so long as such
are lawful, reasonable an din accordance with the general principles of biblical Polity.
th isis the inherent authority and power of presbytery to protect the integrity o fits
meetings and its actions. But the accused also has the right to be given due process to
explain and defend the charges against him.
As the ROC clearly shows RMP had, for several years, been engaged in a series
of controversies with EPC, its session and TE Nickoley. This resulted in the dissolution
of its relationship with EPC and charges being instituted against TE Nickoley. But in
spite of this background, RMP should have given TE Nickoley the full opportunity to
explain and defend his refusal to obey its order and instruction. The ROC does not
reveal that TE Nickoley was given such an ample opportunity to explain and defend his
action. In fairness and justice, the accused was entitled to this right.
CONCLUSION
We find no specific provision in the BCO which deals with the exact factual
situation in this case and would authorize such immediate action on a charge of
contumacy without a trial
Appellee acknowledges this fact but argues that RMP had such authority, by
inference, from certain BCO provisions and under the general powers given to
presbytery.
We have concluded that in the light of the lack of such a specific BCO
authorization and duet o th every serious nature of the charge together with the drastic
effect of the judgment to depose TE Nickoley from ministry, that the accused should
have been given a trial under the due process provisions of the b coin order for him to
have ample opportunity to answer this charge and defend his actions.
wear e of the opinion that such would be in the interest of fairness and justice in
a court of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We do not say that RMP is deprived of its right and power to judge its member.
We see no reason why RMP could not now initiate such a trial and include in its
charges this issue of contumacy and the issue of TE Nickoley’s violation of his
ordination vows.
For these reasons, we have remanded the case back to RMP with our
recommendations that it choose one of the courses we set forth in our judgment.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Dr Michael D. Bolus Is/ Robert Miller /s/ W. Jack Williamson
NOTE: This preliminary decision was written by W. Jack Williamson with the
concurrence of Dr. Michael D. Bolus and Robert Miller.

#### V. Voting on Proposed Decision

Adopted by SJC: 17 Concurring, 1 Recused, 6 Absent.

## 2. COMPLAINT, CASE 97-3

### BRUCE NICKOLEY
VS.
ROCKY MOUNTAIN PRESBYTERY

This case was determined to be out of order per SJC Manual 10.1. The following finding was unanimously approved by the full Standing Judicial Commission: “The Chairman and Secretary determined that the case was administratively out of order in that the matter about which the complaint was lodged was also the subject of an appeal. BCO 43-1 provides, ‘...no complaint is allowable in a judicial case in which an appeal is taken.’ In the matter at hand, to wit, the Rocky Mountain Presbytery action dissolving the relationship between itself and Evergreen Church, an appeal was granted to Evergreen Church and hearing of the appeal was docketed for the January 22 – 24, 1997, meeting of Presbytery.”

## 3. APPEAL, CASE 97-4

### MRS. NANCY A. CONRAD, et al.
VS.
CENTRAL CAROLINA PRESBYTERY

### I. Summary of the Facts

1. On January 27, 1996, Central Carolina Presbytery (CCP) sustained a complaint brought by the complainants, finding, among other things, that “although the Session of PPC may have had grounds to remove members from the roll, they failed to take the required action to remove them...” and, as a result, the Session of Prosperity Presbyterian Church (PPC) was in error when it dropped certain names from the membership roll (ROC 8b).

2. The Session of Prosperity Presbyterian Church was informed of Central Carolina Presbytery’s decision to sustain the complaint. On May 16, 1996, the following actions were taken:

(a) the Session of PPC approved the language of a letter to be sent out to Conrad, et al. acknowledging the procedural error on its part in their prior action of removing the names of Conrad, et al. from the rolls of PPC (ROC p. 4-5).

(b) the Session of PPC noted that the previous action in removing the names of certain members of PPC from the membership rolls is “null and void” (ROC p. 9). The CCP nullified the action because the clerk of PPC Session had acted apart from the Session of PPC taking any action to remove the names.

(c) the Session of PPC then voted to remove from the membership of PPC the names of Conrad, et al. (ROC p. 3-5).

(d) the Session of PPC sent copies of “the preceding actions taken to this date regarding church rolls” to the Clerk of CCP (ROC p. 5).

(e) the Session of PPC approved sending the letter of notification to Conrad, et al., informing them of the actions of the Session of PPC on May 16, 1996 (ROC p. 9).

3. On June 12, 1996, Conrad, et al. brought a complaint to the Session of PPC against the “delinquency of the Session of PPC and their actions” in removing the names of Conrad, et al. from the rolls of PPC, maintaining that such action was “in defiance of the judicial decision rendered by the CCP at its January 1996 stated meeting...” (ROC p. 6).

4. The complaint of Conrad, et al. was denied by the Session of PPC on June 27, 1996 (ROC p. 11).

5. On July 22, 1996, Conrad, et al. brought their complaint to the CCP and sought relief from the May 16, 1996, action of the Session of PPC in removing the names of Conrad, et al. from the rolls of PPC (ROC p. 10).

6. On January 25-26, 1997, the CCP erected a Judicial Commission and heard the complaint. The CCP sustained the commission’s recommendation to deny the complaint (ROC p. 12).

7. A complaint was lodged with the Stated Clerk of the PCA, requesting that the SJC hear the case (ROC p. 1). The present case, 97-4, was filed on February 7, 1997, and referred to a panel which adjudicated the case on November 13, 1997, in Charlotte, NC.

## II. Statement of the Issue

Did the Central Carolina Presbytery act unconstitutionally on January 25-26, 1997, in denying the complaint of July 22, 1996?

## III. Judgment in the Case

No. The CCP did not act unconstitutionally in denying the complaint of June 27, 1996.

## IV. Reasoning and Opinion

Based on the ROC, the complainants did not demonstrate any unconstitutional procedure or violations of the PCA Book of Church Order committed by the Central Carolina Presbytery. The various actions taken by the parties were open to differing opinions and various interpretations, thus resulting in disagreement among the parties. In their oral argument, the Complainants desired to introduce material from previous cases which they believed had a direct bearing on the case. Nevertheless, the panel was limited in the scope of its consideration to those facts properly before us in the Record of the Case. On that basis, the panel’s finding is that no violation of the constitution was demonstrated by the evidence in the case.

This preliminary judgment was written by Jim Smith with the concurrence of TE David Hall and RE Ed Robeson.

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
