# Case 2001-30 — Session of Third Presbyterian Church Evangel Presbytery

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 31st (2003)  ·  **Disposition:** dismissed  ·  **Vote:** 19-0-1  ·  **Dissent:** yes  ·  **BCO cited:**  Preliminary Principle 8 3 11 13-9 43 

*Source: [ga31_2003 pp. 103–107](../markdown/ga31_2003.md)*

---

**Case 2001-30**

**COMPLAINT OF THIRD PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH**

**VS.**

**EVANGEL PRESBYTERY**

**I. Summary of the Facts**
This case arises out of a dispute between Third Presbyterian Church,
Birmingham and Covenant Classical School (a non-PCA corporation).
Both parties were interested in locating a Christian school on or near the
church premises. During the summer of 1999, after positive indications
from the church, the school purchased a dental clinic adjoining the church
to use in addition to the church’s educational building. In late September
1999, the church’s attorney drafted and presented a lease to the school,
which the school signed. However, the church never signed the lease. The
school opened in November 1999.
Two months later, on January 18, 2000, the Session removed the
school with the following action:
The Session of Third Presbyterian Church approved a motion to sever
its relationship with Covenant Classical Schools and to ask the school
to vacate the Educational Building within eight weeks during which
time no new work will be initiated on the Building, principally
because of concern over the absence of a strong public statement by
the School that it would be a Christian school, as intimated in earlier
discussions with the School’s Board and representatives, and
secondarily because the monetary goals of the School’s Board
appeared to be more important than the spiritual goals, as intimated
from the principal concern. (ROC 20-21)
(A Presbytery Commission eventually characterized the primary
dispute as follows):

It was over whether or not the school would include a statement of
faith in its information and application packet to parents of prospective
students. The school had decided not to do so because of their desire

to reach non-Christian families, and the church found this to be
unacceptable. The school was unwilling to concede to the church’s
desires on this matter, feeling that it struck at the very core of their
mission. (ROC 20)
The school informed Presbytery of the dispute, and on September 26,
2000 Presbytery appointed a seven-man Commission to offer assistance in
resolving it. (Evangel’s stated meetings are in January, May and
September.)
The school alleged the church unilaterally terminated the churchprepared 99-year lease dated September 30, 1999, even though the church
never signed it. The school wanted the church to reimburse the school
approximately $415,000 - the difference between their total costs of
$640,00 and $225,000 (the proceeds from the sale of the dental clinic).
(ROC 40)
Eventually, the church and school signed an Arbitration Agreement
(legal contract) to enter mediation and, if necessary, binding arbitration in
accord with procedures outlined by the Institute for Christian Conciliation
(ICC). Apparently, the Presbytery Commission acted as both the
“Administrator” and the “Arbitrator” of the conciliation.
On April 21, 2001 a two-man subcommittee of the Commission
attempted to mediate the dispute from 9 AM until 3 PM and when that
failed, the parties proceeded into binding arbitration the same day with the
other five members of the Commission acting as the arbitrators. The
Commission closed the meeting at about 6:30 PM.
The Commission/Arbitrators rendered a decision on April 21 but
sealed it for four weeks to provide the parties a last chance at resolving the
dispute. On May 8, 2001, Presbytery heard an update from the
Commission, but the arbitration decision was not announced until May 18.
The arbitration judgment included the following:
The Commission finds that the majority of the fault for this dispute
lies with the school. Specifically, and in order to quantify an equitable
settlement, we find that the school is 65% responsible and the church
35%. We find, therefore, that Third Presbyterian Church should pay
the covenant Classical School the amount of $57,000. (ROC 14 and
21) The $57,000 is 35% of a net loss figure of $163,245.
The Commission/Arbitrators determined the $57,000 net loss figure as
follows:
$ 300,000 original purchase price of dental clinic adjoining the
church, paid by school
+ 118,745 improvements to the clinic, paid by school

- 225,000 net proceeds from the sale of the clinic after the school
closed

- 5,500 the amount reimbursed to school by the church for
improvements on its property

- 25,000 the church’s estimate of the school’s overpayment in the
original purchase of the clinic
In addition, the Commission/Arbitrators “felt it appropriate to exclude
the school’s operating loss of $151,185, since the school had always
claimed that this would be their risk alone.” (ROC 22)
After being informed of the Commission/Arbitrator’s decision, the
church filed an eight-page complaint with Presbytery on June 12, 2001
asking Presbytery to void the Commission/Arbitrator’s judgment. (ROC
4-11) The church presented the following as grounds in their complaint
(ROC 4-5):
1. Objection to use of the phrase “legally binding agreement.”
2. t pc wa snot given a formal opportunity to make a presentation to
the arbitration committee. TPC never had an equal opportunity to
present their case to the arbitrators of the Commission in a formal
systematic format. The only presentation TPC was able to make
was to defend itself and to clarify the points made in the school’s
presentation.
3. TPC disputes figures used for accessing judgment.
4. Commission arbitrator exhibited biased opinion before all facts
and statements were completed.
5. Inaccuracy of recorded facts and statements found in the minutes
of the Commission.
At its next stated meeting on Sep. 25, 2001, Presbytery considered and
denied the church’s complaint (vote 38-17).
Below are excepts from Presbytery’s minutes of that meeting:
Commission Report and Complaint concerning Third Presbyterian
Church, Birmingham and Covenant Classical School. TE Brad
Allison gave report. Third Presbyterian brought complaint against
Evangel Presbytery after reconciliation between TPC and CCS
failed and both parties entered binding arbitration. Binding
arbitration went against TPC and therefore the complaint.

TE Allison urged the complaint to be denied. TE Dr. Richard
Trucks, pastor of TPC, spoke as to why Presbytery should receive
the complaint. After much discussion, the question was called
with no opposition. Presbytery voted to deny the complaint by a
vote of 38 to 17. It was moved/seconded/passed that the TPC
complaint be denied; and that TPC be given 30 days to either refile a complaint that complains o fa violation of icc rules; or that
during the 30 days the TPC seek a rehearing from the Arbitration
Panel/commission. (ROC 33)

The church then filed complaint with the PCA on October 22, 2001.

**Summary of Case before the SJC**
Jan 22, 2002 Record of Case 2001-30 filed with PCA
Apr 12 SJC Panel received Record of Case (first draft)
Apr 16 Panel Conference Call 1 - Panel requests certain
Presbytery minutes added to the Record.
May 14 Stated Meeting of Presbytery. Respondent appointed.
May 28 Respondent requests three additions to the Record.
Complainant agrees to additions.
June 10 Panel receives Revision 1 of the Record (dated June 6).
June 28 Panel receives Revision 2 of the Record (dated June 25).
July 2 Panel Conference Call. Panel rules that the case is not
judicially in order.
July 8 Panel emails recommended decision to PCA stated clerk

**II. Statement of Issues**
Is this case judicially in order?

**III. Judgment**
The Standing Judicial Commission rules that this complaint is not
judicially in order (SJC Manual 11.5.d).

**IV. Reasoning and Opinion**
The SJC does not have jurisdiction in this case:
Since ecclesiastical discipline must be purely moral and spiritual
in its object, and not attended with any civil effects, it can derive
no force whatever, but from its own justice, the approbation of an
impartial public, and the countenance and blessing of the great
Head of the Church. _(BCO Preliminary Principle 8. See also_
_BCO chapters 3, 11 and 13-9.)_
While we applaud Presbytery’s desire to assist two Christian parties in
a dispute, PCA courts should not serve as civil arbitrators, even if both
parties are under the jurisdiction of the PCA. Evangel Presbytery should
not have accepted that role in the first place. Since it is not within the
jurisdiction o fa church court to serve as a civil arbitrator, then it is not
within the purview of the SJC or the Presbytery to conduct appellate
review of legally binding arbitration judgments either.
In resolving disputes, church courts should only function in the role
assigned by Scripture - as “ecclesiastical arbitrators” (1 Cor. 6, Exodus
18:21-22, Matthew 18, etc.). However, in such a role, the decisions of the
church have no civil effect. And if the parties disagree with the decision,
they may ask the broader/higher church courts to review it via the
complaint process of _BCO_ 43.

The SJC Panel for this case was TE William W. (Bill) Harrell Jr., TE
David P. (Dave) Peterson and RE J. Howard (Howie) Donahoe. The Panel
unanimously adopted the opinion, which was written by RE Donahoe.
Roll call vote on Case 2001-30
TE Dominic A. Aquila Concur RE Thomas F. (Tom) Leopard Recused
RE Frank A. Brock Absent TE Lawrence N. Lunceford Concur
RE Robert C. (Bob) Cannada Concur TE William R. (Bill) Lyle Concur
RE M. C. (Cub) Culbertson Concur RE J. Grant McCabe Concur
RE J. Howard (Howie) Donahoe Concur TE Charles McGowan Absent
RE Samuel J. (Sam) Duncan Concur TE David P. (Dave) Peterson Concur
TE Robert M. Ferguson Jr. Concur TE G. Dewey Roberts Concur
TE Terry L. Gyger Concur TE James L. Smith Jr. Concur
TE William W. (Bill) Harrell Jr. Concur TE Robert D. Stuart Concur
RE Terry L. Jones Concur RE John B. White Jr. Concur
TE Paul D. Kooistra Absent RE W. Jack Williamson Concur

RE Collie W. Lehn Concur
Adopted: 19 concur; 1 recused; 3 absent

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
