# Case 2002-02 — Nichols & Couch v. James River

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 33rd (2005)  ·  **Disposition:** sustained  ·  **Vote:** 13-3-0  ·  **Dissent:** yes  ·  **BCO cited:**  13-9(f) 31-2 43-2 43-2-2 43-1 23-1 14-7 13-9c 20-4 25-11 25-7 16-2 3-1 3-2 3-4 11-2 

*Source: [ga33_2005 pp. 74–99](../markdown/ga33_2005.md)*

---

this case is included with 2001-34 and 2002-3), 2004-4, 2004-9 and 2004-12
were found out of order. Cases 2004-8, 2004-13 and 2005-1 were not completed
in time for the SJC March meeting and await final determination by the full SJC
in October. The Standing Judicial Commission has completed its work on Cases
2001-34, 2002-2, 2002-3, 2003-2, 2003-3, 2003-4, 2003-5, 2004-2, 2004-3,
2004-5, 2004-6, 2004-7. The report on those cases is as follows:

**III. REPORT OF THE CASES**

**JUDICIAL CASE 2001-34, JUDICIAL CASE 2002-02,**
**JUDICIAL CASE 2002-03**

**RE LELAND NICHOLS and RE SAM COUCH**

**VS.**

**JAMES RIVER PRESBYTERY**

**I.** **SUMMARY OF THE FACTS**

**A. INTRODUCTION**
These 3 judicial cases arose out of conflicts between the Session and
Congregation of West End Presbyterian Church, Hopewell, Virginia (WEPC)
and its Pastor, TE Robert Wilson. These conflicts surfaced in a period from
the Fall of 2000 to February, 2002. The fundamental conflict was a desire of
the Session and Congregation of WEPC to dissolve and terminate the
relationship between WEPC and its Pastor, Robert Wilson.

This SJC Panel has decided to report these cases in one decision. There are 17
separate complaints in these 3 cases; but they all deal with some facet of this
same underlying issue. These 17 Complaints were arbitrarily grouped into 3
separate cases. We feel they should be grouped together for all arise out of
the same basic facts; and there are facts in each _Record of the Case (ROC)_
that are necessary for understanding a specific complaint in each case.

We, therefore, feel that the facts in each _ROC_ are necessary for our
understanding each specific case. Therefore, we report them together for the
sake of understanding all the facts necessary for a proper decision. These 17
Complaints are styled:

Case 2001-34, C 05-01, C 06-01, and C 07-01
Case 2002-2, C 10-01, C13-01, and an un-numbered complaint.
Case 2002-3, C 16-1, C 17-01, C 18-01, C19-01, C 20-01, C 21-01,
C 22-01, C 23-01, C 24-01, C 25-01, and C 26-01

**B.** **THE FACTS**
All of these Complaints arose out of a growing dissatisfaction that gradually arose
in the Session and Congregation of WEPC with its Pastor, TE Robert Wilson.

James River Presbytery (JRP) had a long-standing Ministerial and Church
Relations Committee (MCRC). In the Fall of 2000, the Session of WEPC
sought counseling help from the MCRC of JRP regarding these issues.
MCRC began to meet with the Session and the Pastor to assist them with the
problems. At the January 20, 2001 meeting of JRP its MCRC reported that the
Session of WEPC had requested assistance with some of its problems; and
that a subcommittee of MCRC had met with Pastor Robert Wilson and the
Session, with other meetings of the entire MCRC planned in the near future
( _ROC_ 01-34, p. 4 and _ROC_ 02-03, p.32).

The _ROC_ in these 3 cases shows that JRP met 8 times between January 20,
2001 and January 19, 2002 (some places in the _ROC_ states that this latter
meeting is January 20, 2002), to-wit:

January 20, 2001 July 14, 2001
April 21, 2001 July 28, 2001
May 26, 2001 October 20, 2001
June ____, 2001 January 19-20, 2002

JRP dealt with some issues relating to the controversy between Pastor Robert
Wilson and the Session-Congregation of WEPC at each of these 8 meetings.

On February 26, 2001, the Session of WEPC voted to call a congregational
meeting for March 18, 2001 for the purpose of determining whether or not to
continue or dissolve the pastoral relationship between TE Robert Wilson and
WEPC. ( _ROC_ 01-34, p.1).

The Congregation was properly notified of the date, time and purpose for the
Congregational meeting. This notice was by letter to the congregation as well
as by printing notice in the church bulletin and announced from the pulpit.
( _ROC_ 01-34, p.1).

Since the MCRC of JRP had already been dealing with this problem at
WEPC, TE Cal Frett, in his capacity as Chairman of MCRC, was invited by
the Session to moderate this Congregational meeting (and he did so) and
RE Tom Taylor, a member of MCRC, served as Clerk of this Congregational
meeting.

At the Congregational meeting of WEPC, on March 18, 2001, the members of
WEPC voted to dissolve the pastoral relational with TE Wilson. The vote, as
reported on _ROC_ 1 and 18 (01-34) was 99 to 77 to dissolve the pastoral
relationship - (52% to dissolve, 42% to continue, and 5% abstained
_ROC_ 01-34, p.18).

This action was immediately communicated to JRP with the request that
presbytery concur in the dissolution.

JRP then referred this request to its MCRC and asked that it report its
recommendation to the April 21, 2001 Stated Meeting of JRP.

At the April 21, 2001 Presbytery meeting, the MCRC made the following
recommendation:

“With regret, we recommend that Presbytery dissolve
the relationship between TE Bob Wilson and WEPC”.
( _ROC_ 01-34, pp. 6 and 11).

When this recommendation of MCRC came to the floor, a substitute motion
was adopted by JRP, which substitute motion provided:

(1) “To constitute MCRC a commission of Presbytery, clothed with
judicial authority to visit WEPC under authority of _BCO_ 13-9(f)
and 31-2, which commission shall report to JRP by its July
meeting”.
(2) “To postpone action of the request of WEPC to dissolve the
pastoral relationship with TE Robert Wilson until JRP hears the
report of this Commission”. ( _ROC_ 01-34, p. 7).

**CASE 01-34, C 05-1,** _**ROC**_ **pp. 1-3 and 18-20**
On April 27, 2001, RE Sam Couch and 95 other members of WEPC filed a
complaint (C05-01, Case 01-34) against the action of JRP on April 21, 2001
in voting “to postpone the Presbytery ruling on the WEPC’s request to
dissolve the relationship with the pastor”.

**CASE 01-34, C 06-01,** _**ROC**_ **pp.1-3 and 21-22**
On May 18, 2001, RE Leland L. Nichols of WEPC filed a similar complaint
against the action of JRP in failing to dissolve the relationship with TE Robert
Wilson, at its April 21, 2001 meeting (Case 01-34, _ROC,_ pp. 36-37). This
Complaint is styled C-06-01, Case 01-34.

**CASE 01-34, C 07-1 pp.1-3 and 38-39**
On May 20, 2001, the majority of the Session members at WEPC filed a
similar complaint against the action of JRP, at its April 21, 2001 meeting, in
failing to dissolve the relationship of WEPC and its pastor TE Robert Wilson
(Case 01-34, C-07-01, _ROC,_ pp. 38-39).

At a called meeting of JRP on May 26, 2001, a motion passed to add 10
additional men to the MCRC as additional members of the Judicial

Commission under the authority granted by JRP at its April 21, 2001 stated
meeting. (Case 01-34, _ROC,_ p. 12).

**CASE 02-02, C10-1,** _**ROC**_ **6**
On May 21, 2001, the Session of WEPC passed a motion which gave TE
Robert Wilson a “mandatory administrative leave of absence from all teaching
and pastoral duties with full pay and allowances until the July meeting of
JRP.” The Worship Committee of the WEPC Session was assigned the
responsibility of filling the pulpit. The administrative leave of absence was
effective at 12:00 midnight on May 21, 2001. The pay to the pastor during
this administrative leave of absence was to be considered “his severance pay
which will be full pay and allowances until July 31, 2001, and at that time all
pay and allowances will stop.” (Case 02-02, C-10-01, _ROC,_ p.6).

TE Robert Wilson, timely, complained to the Session of WEPC about this
action. On June 19, 2001, the Session denied Pastor Wilson’s complaint. On
July 9, 2001, TE Robert Wilson filed his complaint with JRP against this
action of this Session. In its January 15, 2002 Report to JRP, the Commission
on Complaint C-10-01 ruled that it recommends to JRP that the complaint of
TE Robert Wilson be sustained.

On the January 19-20, 2002 meeting of JRP voted “to uphold the judgments
and decisions of its Commission and their report.”

On February 12, 2002, RE Leland Nichols and RE Sam Couch of WEPC filed
their complaint against JRP for this January 19-20, 2002 action of JRP in
sustaining the Commission’s report of January 15, 2002. This complaint was
filed by Ruling Elders Leland Nichols and Sam Couch of WEPC directly with
the SJC of PCA without first filing it with JRP for its action at January 19-20,
2002 presbytery meeting.

**C 13-01,** _**ROC**_ **p.7**
On June 19, 2001, the Session of WEPC voted to admonish Pastor Robert
Wilson for receiving “something that did not belong to him” when he
received and cashed checks written by the church secretary and given to him
as his severance pay through July 31, 2001. (Case 02-02, C 13-01, _ROC_ p.7).
Pastor Wilson, timely complained to the Session of WEPC about this action.
On July 16, 2001, at a regular Session meeting, the WEPC Session denied the
complaint of Pastor Wilson. Pastor Wilson filed on July 20, 2001 his
complaint, dated July 18, 2001, with JRP against this July 16, 2001 action of
WEPC Session. (Case 02-02, C 13-01, _ROC,_ p.7).

At the July 14, 2001 meeting of JRP, a partial report of its Judicial Commission
was made to deal with these complaints of WEPC (Case 1-34, p. 13-14). The

Judicial Commission’s chairman made a motion for JRP to approve the
Commission’s action which declared that the WEPC Session’s leave of
absence forced upon TE Robert Wilson was unconstitutional and invalid. The
Moderator ruled that this motion was “out of order” based on an error being
made by JRP for “making a constitutional decision without due process”.
Hence this motion was not allowed (Case 01-34, _ROC,_ pp. 13-14).

At this July 14, 2001 meeting of JRP a 2 [nd] recommendation was made by the
Judicial Commission and seconded, to

“dissolve the pastoral relationship, today July 14, 2001, between
TE Robert and WEPC by upholding the majority vote of the
congregation of WEPC on March 18, 2001.” (Case 01-34, _ROC_
p.14).

Upon a show of hands, the Moderator declared that 2 [nd] recommendation
failed. (Case 01-34, _ROC_, p.15)

At this July 14, 2001 meeting of JRP a motion was adopted finding in order
the following complaints:

(1) Case 01-34, Complaint C5-01, _ROC_ 18-20
(2) Case 01-34, Complaint C6-01, _ROC_ 21-22
(3) Case 01-34, Complaint C7-01, _ROC_ 23-4

These 3 complaints, being in order, were assigned by JRP to its Judicial
Commission for adjudication (Case 1-34, _ROC,_ p.17).

On July 25, 2001, RE Sam Couch of WEPC filed his complaint dated June 23,
2001 for JRP’s approval of “an announcement” by JRP’s Judicial Commission.
In the _ROC_, we find a notice, dated June 26, 2001, sent by the Judicial Commission
to the Stated Clerk of JRP for distribution to each teaching and ruling elder of JRP.
(Case 02-03, _ROC_ p.33, Item 20, dated June 26, 2001). It appears that this
announcement was included in the mailing by the JRP Stated Clerk in his mailing
for the July 14, 2001 JRP meeting ( _ROC_ p.24). At its July 14, 2001 Presbytery
Meeting, a motion was made to approve this “announcement”. The Moderator
declared the motion to approve this “announcement” was “Out of Order”. (Case
02-03, page 25). Therefore, the “announcement” was not approved by JRP.

**CASE 02-03, C 17-01,** _**ROC**_ **6-7**
On July 25, 2001, Sam Couch, a RE at WEPC, filed his complaint, dated July
23, 2001, with the Stated Clerk of JRP, against the action of JRP in denying,
at its Presbytery meeting of July 14, 2001, his motion to dissolve that day the
pastoral relationship between TE Robert Wilson and WEPC by upholding the
vote of the congregation of WEPC on March 18, 2001. The JRP Commission

reported on January 15, 2002 and recommended that JRP deny this complaint.
JRP at its January 19-20 meeting voted “to uphold the judgments and
decisions of its Commission” (Case 02-03, p.30). RE Leland Nichols and
Sam Couch filed a complaint, dated February 12, 2002 and filed February 19,
2002 against the action of JRP in denying this complaint. This complaint was
filed with the SJC of PCA (Case 02-03, _ROC,_ pp. 1-2 and 6-7).

**CASE 02-03, C 18-01, pp. 8-9**
On July 24, 2001 Ruling Elder Leland L. Nichols of WEPC filed a complaint,
dated July 20, 2001, against JRP’s Judicial Commission’s report to JRP on
July 15, 2001. (Case 02-03, C-18-01, _ROC_ p. 8). In SJC Cases 02-02 and 0203, there is no report of any action taken by JRP at its July 14, 2001 in regards
to these recommendations made by its Judicial Commission. However, there
is in the _ROC_ for Judicial Case 2001-34, at _ROC,_ pp. 13-14, a partial report of
the Commission to the JRP meeting of July 14, 2001, which report contains 2
recommendations as follows:

**Recommendation 1** : A motion was made to approve the
Commission’s action determining that the Session’s leave of
absence forced on TE Robert Wilson was unconstitutional and
invalid. The Moderator declared this motion to approve the
action of the Judicial Commission to be out of order. So this
motion was not allowed. (Case 01-34, _ROC,_ pp. 13-14)

**Recommendation 2** : A motion was made to instruct the
Judicial Commission to complete its work by July 19. A
substitute motion was moved seconded as follows:

“That JRP dissolve the pastoral relationship
today, July 14, 2001, between TE Robert
Wilson and WEPC by upholding the majority
vote of the congregation on March 18, 2001.”
(Case 01-34, _ROC,_ p. 14)

This substitute motion was defeated and Recommendation 2 of the
Commission was adopted. At the July 28, 2001 meeting of JRP, the Judicial
Commission made its “final report” concerning the West End Presbyterian
Church and any business arising from the above (Case 01-34 pp. 26-32).

The Judicial Commission made 2 recommendations to JRP, as aforesaid:

**Recommendation 1** : “The Commission finds that West End
Presbyterian Church’s reasons for being relieved of its pastor
are insufficient ( _BCO_ 23-1) and therefore Presbytery declines to

dissolve the pastoral relation between West End Presbyterian
Church and TE Robert Wilson.”

This recommendation was adopted by JRP by a vote of 21 for, 16 against and
0 abstentions.

**Recommendation 2** : “The Commission, finding the problems
to be deep and extremely grievous in WEPC, recommends that
a special committee of Presbytery be appointed to counsel and
assist the teaching elders and ruling elders of WEPC in
resolving divisions that currently exist, and that this committee
be continued for at least a year and report regularly at stated
meetings of Presbytery. (Note: the committee would be
available to counsel the elders of WEPC upon invitation by
them to do so)”
This Recommendation 2 was adopted by JRP by a vote of 26 for, 11 against,
0 abstentions. (Case 01-34, _ROC_ p. 17)

**CASE 02-03, C 19-01,** _**ROC**_ **pp. 10-11**
On August 3, 2001, RE Leland Nichols of WEPC filed a complaint against
JRP for its approval on July 14, 2001 of certain actions and recommendations
of the Judicial Commission ( _ROC_ Case 02-03, C 19-01, pp. 10 and 11).

The actions of JRP listed in said complaint are three (3), to-wit:

(1) the “announcement” of the Judicial Commission sent out in
the mailing to the teaching and ruling elders for the July 14,
2001 JRP meeting.
(2) The Judicial Commission’s Report to the July 14, 2001 JRP
meeting declaring the actions of the WEPC Session
“unconstitutional” and issuing orders to WEPC Session “to
restore Dr. Wilson to the performance of his pastoral
duties.”
(3) The action of the Judicial Commission informing “any
teaching elder and ruling elder, licentiate, or man under care
in JRP that they must have the advice and consent of TE
Robert Wilson in order to fill the pulpit at WEPC” (Case 0203, page 10).

There are no minutes of the July 14, 2001 JRP meeting reported in the _ROC_
for Judicial Cases 02-02 and 02-03. However, in Judicial Case 01-34 there
are 2 excerpts from the July 14, 2001 minutes ( _ROC_ Case 01-34 pp. 13-17).
At page 16, there is a copy of the “Partial Report of Commission” dealing
with WEPC. There is nothing in the excerpts indicating that JRP took any

action on this “Partial Report” at its July 14, 2001 meeting except on two
recommendations, as follows:

**Recommendation 1** : (pages 13-14): “A motion was moved and
seconded that Presbytery accept the actions of this Commission
as the actions of JRP specifically regarding the determination of
the leave of absence forced on TE Robert Wilson as being, in
this case, unconstitutional and invalid”. ( _ROC_ 01-34, p. 13)

Regarding this Recommendation No. 1, the JRP minutes reflect this action:

“A point of order was raised regarding the appropriateness of the
court making a constitutional decision without due process and
the Moderator determined that the motion to approve the action
of the commission was out of order.” (Case 01-34, p. 13-14).

**Recommendation 2** : (pages 14-15): This recommendation did
not relate to any of the 3 issues raised in the complaint ( _ROC_
Case 02-03, C 19-01 pp. 10-11), above.
Thus, as to the above 3 issues in this complaint (C19-01) the facts are:

**Issue 1** : This “announcement” was never approved by
JRP”. At its July 14, 2001 meeting, Presbytery never
voted to approve the MCR Announcement. Indeed, after
floor discussion, the Moderator declared the motion to
approve was out of order” (Case 02-03 p.25).
**Issue 2** : This issue was ruled “out of order” by the
Moderator at the July 14, 2001 JRP meeting (Case 01-34
pp. 13-14).
**Issue 3** : There is no evidence in the _ROC_ of Judicial

Case 01-34, 02-02, and 02-03 that this issue was
approved by JRP at its July 14, 2001 meeting.

Thus there are no facts in the _ROC_ of these 3 actions to sustain
Complaint 19-01 in Judicial Case 02-03.

**CASE 02-03, C 20-01,** _**C**_ **26-01)**
On August 4, 2001, RE Sam Couch of WEPC filed his complaint, dated
August 3, 2001, against the action of JRP at its July 28, 2001 in approving a
recommendation of its Judicial Commission to appoint “a Special Committee
of Presbytery to counsel and assist the teaching elders and ruling elders of
WEPC in resolving divisions that currently exist. This committee would be
continued for at least one year and report regularly at Stated Meetings of
JRP.” (Case 02-03, C 20-01, p. 18).

At its meeting on July 28, 2001, JRP approved Recommendation 2 of its
Judicial Commission which provided for appointment of “a special committee
of JRP to counsel and its teaching elders and ruling elders of WEPC in
resolving division that currently exist, and that this committee be continued
for at least a year and report regularly at Stated Meetings of JRP (Note: the
committee would be available to counsel the elders of WEPC upon invitation
by them tod o so.)” (Judicial Case 01-34, Complaint 20-01, _ROC,_ p. 26).

The above complaint (Judicial Case 02-03, C 26-01, p. 12) failed to note that
the proposed committee “would be available to counsel the elders upon
invitation by them tod o so.”

A new commission on complaints from WEPC was appointed by JRP at its
October 20, 2001 meeting. (Judicial Case 02-03, p. 23). This new commission
reported to JRP on Jan. 15, 2002. This report points out that C-20-01 of Judicial
Case 02-03, p. 12 is a duplicate case with Judicial Case 02-03, C-26-07, _ROC_
p.21. This new commission, in its January 15, 2002 report to JRP noted that the
“invitation to be given by WEPC was never extended and the committee was
never appointed.” (Judicial Case 02-03, _ROC,_ p.25)

The Commission’s recommendation to JRP on January 15, 2002 declared the
Complaint C20-01 to be moot. It stated that “the complaint fails to note that
the committee was to proceed only upon the invitation of the Session. The
invitation was never extended. Therefore, the committee was not appointed”
(Case 02-03, C20-01, p.25).

But the Complaint C20-01 states that it complains against:

“The decision of July 28,2001 of JRP for approving he
Commission Report Recommendation #2" (See above.)

The complaint was not against the actions that Session “never invited the
Committee or that the Committee was never appointed.” The Complaint is
against the JRP action in approving such a committee.

At the JRP meeting of January 19-20, 2002 JRP voted to “uphold the
judgments and decisions of its commission and their report.”

By a complaint, dated February 12, 2002 and filed February 19, 2002 RE Sam
Couch and RE Leland Nichols of WEPC filed their complaint with PCA - SJC
for denying their Complaint C20-01. (Case 02-03, C20-01, _ROC,_ p. 1-2).

**Case 02-03, C 21-01, pp. 14-15**
On August 9, 2001 a complaint, dated August 8, 2001, was filed by RE
Leland L. Nichols of WEPC against JRP for failure at its July 28,2001
meeting to “dissolve the pastoral relationship between TE Robert Wilson and
WEPC.” (Judicial Case 02-03, C 21-01, pp. 14-15). At its congregational
meeting on March 18, 2001, by a majority vote, WEPC had requested the
dissolution of the relationship between TE Robert Wilson and WEPC. At each
meeting of JRP subsequent to that date (April 21, May 26, June __, July 14
and July 28, 2001) this request had been reaffirmed; but JRP continued to
postpone action on this request until it heard from its Judicial Commission
appointed on April 21, 2001. This Judicial Commission reported to this July
28, 2001 meeting of JRP (Judicial Case 01-34, pp. 26-31). In its report this
Judicial Commission made 2 recommendations to JRP, both of which were
adopted by JRP (Case 01-34, p. 26). These recommendations were:

**Recommendation 1** : “By unanimous vote, the Commission
finds the WEPC reasons for being relieved of its pastor are
insufficient and therefore Presbytery declines to dissolve the
pastoral relationship between WEPC and TE Robert Wilson
(Case 01-34, p. 26).”
**Recommendation 2** : “The Commission finding problems to be
deep and extremely grievous in WEPC, recommends that a
special committee of JRP be appointed to counsel and assist the
teaching elders and ruling elders of WEPC in resolving
divisions that currently exist, and that this committee be
continued for at least a year and report regularly at stated
meetings of presbytery. (Note: The committee would be
available to counsel the elders of WEPC upon invitation by
them to do so” C01-34, p. 26).

The new Commission appointed by JRP at its stated meeting on October 20,
2001 was assigned this complaint (C21-01) to consider. In this Commission’s
Report of January 15, 2002 (Case 02-03, pp. 25-26) this new Commission
recommended to JRP this decision on this complaint, to-wit:

“The Commission unanimously declares that all 3 complaints
(C21, 22, 25-01) were mooted by the vote of JRP on October
20, 2001 to dissolve the relationship” between TE Robert
Wilson and WEPC. (Case 02-03, p. 26).

At the meeting of JRP on January 19, 2002, the Presbytery voted “to uphold
the judgments and decisions of its Commission and their report at this
meeting” (Case 02-03, p. 30).

On February 19, 2002, RE Leland Nichols and RE Sam Couch of WEPC filed
a complaint against JRP for approving at JRP’s January 19-20, 2002 meeting
these recommended judgments and decisions in the Commission’s January 15,
2002 Report. This complaint was filed directly to the SJC. (Case 02-03, p. 1,
Complaint unnumbered).

**CASE 02-03, C 22-01, pp.** _**ROC**_ **16-17**
A complaint dated August 14, 2001 was filed with the Stated Clerk of JRP on
August 15, 2001 by re leland nichols of WEPC. This complaint is against
an action by JRP at its July 28, 2001 meeting, where it received the final
report of its first Judicial Commission and approved its recommendations (1)
declining to dissolve the pastoral relations between WEPC and TE Robert
Wilson (2) and appointing anew committee to visit we pc fora t least a year
for counseling TE Robert Wilson and the ruling elders of WEPC in attempt to
resolve their divisions (Case 01-34, pp. 25-26). This complaint was assigned
to the new commission appointed by JRP at its October 20, 2001 meeting
(Case 02-03, p. 23).

This new commission made its report dated January 15, 2002 (Case 02-03 pp.
23-29D). This report recommended to JRP that this was one of three
complaints (Cases 21, 22, 25-01) which “were mooted by JRP on October 20,
2001” by its action to dissolve the pastoral relationship between TE Robert
Wilson and WEPC (Case 02-03, _ROC_ pp. 25-26).

At the meeting of JRP on January 19, 2002 the presbytery voted “to uphold
the judgments and decisions of its Commission and their report.” (Case 02-03,
p. 30).

On February 19, 2002, Ruling Elders Leland Nichols and Sam Couch of
WEPC filed a complaint with the SJC against the action of JRP in denying
this Complaint (Case 02-03, C22-01, pp. 1-2).

**CASE 02-03, C 23-01,** _**ROC**_ **p.18**
On August 15, 2001, a complaint dated August 14, 2001, was filed by RE
Leland L. Nichols of WEPC against JRP (Case 02-03, _ROC_ p. 18) for its
action on July 28, 2001 in approving a motion “to pay a full salary and
allowances to Dr. R. C. Wilson for a period of 3 months, pending the refusal
of WEPC to make payments to him”. There are no minutes in the _ROC_ of the
JRP July 29, 2001 meeting that list this motion. But the Report of the JRP
Commission, dated January 14, 2002, acknowledged the action that this
complaint challenges “Presbytery’s decision at its called meeting on July 28,
2001 to approve a meeting to pay TE Wilson’s salary and allowances for 3
months from July 31 in the event he is not paid by WEPC”. (Case 02-03, p. 27).

The Commission, in its January 15, 2002 report to JRP recommended that the
Complaint (Case 23-01) be denied (Case 02-03, p. 27).

At the meeting of JRP on January 19, 2002 JRP voted “to uphold the judgments
and decisions of its Commission and their report.” (Case 02-03, p. 30).

On February 19, 2002 Ruling Elders Leland Nichols and Sam Couch of
WEPC filed a complaint with the SJC against the action of JRP in denying
this complaint. (Case 02-03, C23-01, _ROC_ p. 1-2).

**CASE 02-03, C 24-01,** _**ROC**_ **p. 19**
On August 18, 2001, RE Sam Couch of WEPC filed a complaint, dated
August 13, 2001, against the action of JRP on July 28, 201 in approving “the
payment of a salary to TE Wilson for 90 days.” (Case 02-03, p.19).

There are no minutes of the JRP meeting of July 28, 2001 in the _ROC_ that list
this motion. But the report of the JRP Commission dated January 15, 2002,
acknowledged the actions that this complaint challenged “Presbytery’s
decision at its called meeting of July 28, 201 to approve a motion to pay TE
Wilson’s salary and allowances for 3 months from July 31, in the event he is
not paid by WEPC” (Case 02-03, p. 27).

The JRP Commission in its January 15, 2002 report recommended that this
complaint (C24-01) be denied (Case 02-03, p. 27).

At the meeting of JRP on January 19-20, 2002, JRP voted “to uphold the
judgments and decisions of its commission and their report”. (Case 02-03, p.
30).

On February 19, 2001, Ruling Elder Sam Couch of WEPC filed a complaint
with the SJC of PCA against the action of JRP in denying the complaint (Case
02-03, C24-01, _ROC_ pp. 1-2).

**CASE 02-03, C 25-01,** _**ROC**_ **p. 20**
On August 18, 2001, RE Sam Couch of WEPC filed a complaint, dated
August 13, 2001, against the decision of JRP to adopt the recommendation of
its Commission as follows:

“By unanimous vote (11-0-0) the Commission finds that
WEPC’s reasons for being relieved of its pastor are insufficient
( _BCO_ 23-1); and therefore Presbytery declines to dissolve the
pastoral relationship between WEPC and TE Wilson” (Case 0134, p. 26).

In JRP’s “Commission on complaints from WEPC”, report dated January 15,
2002 (Case 01-03, pp. 23-29). The Commission recommends to JRP that this

complaint (C25-01) was “mooted by the vote of JRP on October 20, 2001 to
dissolve the relationship between Pastor Wilson and WEPC (Case 02-03, p. 26).”

On January19, 2002, JRP voted “to uphold the judgments of its Commission
and their report.” (Case 02-03, p. 30).

On February 19, 2002, RE Sam Couch of WEPC filed his complaint, dated
February 12, 2002, against the action of JRP in denying this complaint (Case
02-03, C-25-01, pp. 1 and 2).

**CASE 02-03; C 20-01,C 26-01**
These complaints are exactly, word for word, the same as Case 02-03, C 2001, _ROC_ p. 12. Both complaints were filed by R. E. Sam Couch of WEPC.
These 2 complaints will be considered together.

**II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES**

1. Were all 17 of the complaints in Judicial Cases 01-34, 02-02, and 02-03
judicially in order?
2. Did James River Presbytery err, at its April 21, 2001 meeting and
subsequent meetings when it declined to approve its Ministerial and
Church Relations Committee’s (MCRC) recommendation to grant the
constitutional request of West End Church to dissolve the relationship
between TE Robert Wilson, its pastor and West End Presbyterian
Church?
3. Did James River Presbytery err in approving a motion, at its July 28,
2001 presbytery meeting, to make a gift equivalent to full salary and
allowances to TE R. C. Wilson for a period of 3 months, pending a
refusal of West End Presbyterian Church to continue payments to him?

**III.** **JUDGMENT**

1. No. Not all 17 complaints within Judicial Cases 2001-34, 2002-02 and
2002-03 were judicially in order. The following complaints were
not judicially in order, to-wit:

Complaint 07-01, Judicial Case 2001-34
Complaint 10-01, Judicial Case 2002-02
Complaint 13-01, Judicial Case 2002-02
Unnumbered Complaint - Judicial Case 2002-02
Complaint 16-01, Judicial Case 2002-03
Complaint 18-01, Judicial Case 2002-03
Complaint 19-01, Judicial Case 2002-03

All the other complaints in these cases were in order.

2. Yes. James River Presbytery had no constitutional basis at its
Presbytery meetings in 2001beginning with its April 21, 2001
meeting, permitting it to delay granting a proper constitutional
request by West End Presbyterian Church to dissolve the
relationship between the local church and its pastor.

3. No. This gift was within the discretion of James River Presbytery to
determine its own benevolent giving.

**IV.** **REASONING AND OPINION**

1. **CASES RULED JUDICIALLY OUT OF ORDER**

Complaint 10-01, Judicial Case 2002-02 was not judicially in order. On
July 6, 2001 TE Robert C. Wilson complained to JRP against the action
of the Session of WEPC for denying his complaint. On January 19,
2002, JRP sustained the complaint of TE Robert C. Wilson against the
Session of WEPC. On February 11, 2002, RE Sam Couch and RE
Leland Nichols filed their complaint directly with SJC of PCA without
first filing it with JRP.

_BCO_ 43-2-2 states:

“A complaint must first be made to the Court whose
actor decision is alleged to be in error. . .”

The SJC Manual Section 11.5 provides that a judicial panel of the
SJC shall “determine if the case is judicially in order and ready for
hearing”. The SJC Manual then provides:

“This review shall include: . . . (B) in the case of
a complaint, was the complaint first filed with
the Court whose act or decision is alleged to be
in error ( _BCO_ 43-2)”.

This complaint C10-01 was not first filed with JRP who on January
19-20, 2002 acted on the matter but was filed directly with the SJC
of PCA. Thus the Complaint is judicially out of order.

C-13-01 was out of order for the action of JRP against which the
complaint was filed, according to the _ROC_, was never taken. The
motion against which the complaint was made was ruled “out of order.”

The unnumbered Complaint (Case 02-02, _ROC_ p. 1(c) ) was sustained by
JRP on January 19-20, 2002 and this complaint was filed directly with
SJC - PCA without first filing with JRP. It was judicially out of order.

C-16-01 was against the approval of an “announcement” made by JRP to
its congregations. At the July 14, 2001 meeting of JRP a motion was
made to approve this “announcement”. The Moderator declared this
motion “out of order”. Thus the action complained of was never taken
and the complaint is judicially out of order.

C-18-01 and C-19-01. These complaints were against action by JRP at
its July 14, 2001 meeting approving certain actions and
recommendations of its Judicial Commission. There is no such action in
the _ROC_ (Case 02-03). The action was taken at the January 19-20, 2002
meeting of JRP. The complaints against such action of JRP on February
19, 2002 were filed with SJC of PCA instead of first filing with JRP.
Therefore these complaints are judicially out of order.

The same as the ruling on C-10-1, above, is true for the unnumbered
complaint of Judicial Case 2002. It, too, was judicially out of order.

C-7-01 was deemed to be out of order because it was brought by the
session not by an individual as required by _BCO_ 43-1.

2. **THE CONSTITUTIONAL REQUEST OF WEPC TO DISSOLVE**
**THE RELATIONSHIP WITH ITS PASTOR**

At a constitutionally called and conducted congregational meeting on
March 18, 2001 a majority of those members voting, voted to dissolve
the relationship of WEPC and Pastor Robert Wilson. This
congregational meeting was moderated and conducted by members of
JRP’s Ministerial and Church Relations Committee which had been
counseling with the Pastor and Session for several months. At the April
21, 2001 JRP meeting, its MCRC recommended to the presbytery the
following:

“With regret, we recommend that presbytery
dissolve the relationship between TE Robert
Wilson and WEPC.”

JRP refused to concur with this constitutional request of WEPC at its
April 21, May 26, June, July 14, and July 28, 2001 meetings of
Presbytery. Instead, JRP appointed a 16 man Judicial Commission to
investigate and act. Finally JRP also appointed a committee to meet with
the pastor and elders of WEPC for one year to counsel them if requested

tod o sob y the session. No request was forthcoming from the Session,
and the committee was never appointed.

In the _ROC_ for these 3 cases, JRP constantly refers to _BCO_ 13-9c and
Chapter 23-1 as its authority for postponing the constitutional request of
WEPC to dissolve its relationship with TE Robert Wilson.

Let us then look at those 2 _BCO_ Sections as we hold that JRP has
misinterpreted these 2 Sections.

**POINT 1 -** _**BCO**_ **13-9c**
This _BCO_ section deals with the “powers” of a presbytery. Among these
powers is the power “to establish the pastoral relationship, to dissolve it
at the request of one or both parties, or where the interest of religion
imperatively demands it.”

We know that there are limitations on the power of the presbytery “to
establish the pastoral relationship.” For instance, Preliminary Principle
No. 6 states:

“the power to elect persons to the exercise of
authority in any particular society resides in that
society.”

hence a pres byte ry doe snot have the power to force a minister o na
congregation without the prior consent of the congregation; nor does a
pres byte ry have the authority to force a congregation toke epa pastor
when said congregation has made a constitutional request to Presbytery
to dissolve the relationship. Any interpretation of any provisions of the
_BCO_, which conflicts with this authority, is an erroneous interpretation.
Also, Preliminary Principle No. 7 states:

“All church power . . . is only ministerial and declarative
since the Holy Scriptures are the only rule of faith and
practice.”

And Preliminary Principle No. 8 states:

“Since ecclesiastical discipline must be purely moral or
spiritual in its objects . . . and not attended with any civil
effects . . .”

_BCO_ Chapter 3 is entitled “the nature and extent of church power.”

This chapter states:

“The power, as exercised by the people, extends to the
choice of those officers whom He (Christ) has appointed in
His Church . . .”

_BCO_ Chapter 16, entitled “Church Orders” states:

“The government of the church is by officers gifted to
represent Christ, and the right of God’s people to
recognize by election to office those so gifted is
inalienable. Therefore, no man can be placed over a
church in any office without the election, or at least the
consent of that church.”

_BCO_ Section 13-9c states that Presbytery has the power to dissolve
the pastoral relationship when either “one” of the parties or when
“both” of the parties request. Here “one” of the parties (the
congregation) made the request and it should have been promptly
granted.

**POINT 2 -** _**BCO**_ **23-1**
This Chapter deals specifically with the issue of THE DISSOLUTION
OF THE PASTORAL RELATION. Let us analyze the situations with
which this Section 23-1 deals.

**FIRST PARAGRAPH**
This deals with “when a minister shall tender the resignation of his
pastoral charge to his Presbytery . . .” This is not the factual situation in
the cases before us.

**SECOND PARAGRAPH**
This deals with “if any church desires to be relieved of its pastor, a
similar procedure shall be observed”. What is “a similar procedure”?
The Presbytery should cite the minister to appear to show cause why the
Presbytery should or should not dissolve the relationship. The only
requirement for the Presbytery is to determine that there was “a meeting
of the congregation called and conducted in the same manner as a call of
the pastor”. There is no other requirement. Without further instructions
in this _BCO_ 23-1, it logically follows that if the Presbytery determines
that such a congregational meeting was constitutionally called and
properly held, and the majority voted to dissolve its relationship with the
pastor, then it is a purely administrative matter for Presbytery to concur
in the dissolution of the relationship between the pastor and the local
church.

In failing to follow this _BCO_ provision, JRP erred.

**POINT 3 -** _**BCO**_ **20-4 and 23-1**
This chapter is entitled “The Election of Pastors”

it states the method by which a local church may call a pastor. In
exercising this right a congregation meeting shall be called for the

election of a pastor; and at such congregational meeting _BCO_ Ch. 20-4
requires the following, to-wit:

“In every case a majority of all the voters present shall be
required to elect.”

_BCO_ 23-1 states:

“If any church desires to be relieved of a pastor, a similar
procedure shall be observed.”

WEPC followed this procedure and JRP erred in not immediately
concurring in the constitutional request from the congregation of WEPC
to dissolve the relationship with its Pastor, TE Robert Wilson.

**POINT 4 -** _**BCO**_ **CHAPTER 25**
There are 3 basic forms of church government: (a) congregational or
independent; (b) hierarchical (aristocratic or prelatic); (c) Presbyterian or
representative.

Within the presbyterian or representative category, there are those which
are more “aristocratic” and those which are more “democratic”.
Historically, many forms of church polity which are representative have
existed with many individual variations. PCA chose its own form within
Biblical Principles. There are certain biblical precepts upon which the
PCA- _BCO_ is based, to-wit:

(1) “The relationship (between a particular church and the
denomination) is voluntary based upon mutual love and
confidence and is in no sense to be maintained by any
force or coercion whatsoever. ( _BCO_ 25-11).” This
fellowship is voluntary and can be severed by either at
will, without penalty or forfeiture.

(2) The local church has the exclusive right to choose it minister
and its officers. ( _BCO_ Chapters 20 and 24). No one can
force a minister upon a local congregation; and no one can
govern a local congregation except _BCO_ '3-1 officers chosen
by its members. (Preface II (6); _BCO_ 16-2)

(3) For the preservation of the unity of the church and the
purity of the faith once delivered to the saints, PCA
established a series of graded church courts. The power as
distinguished from the authority of these various courts is
“spiritual”, “ministerial”, “moral”, and “declarative” ( _BCO_
Preface II-7, II-8, §3-2, §3-4, §11-2).

Thus PCA chose the more democratic form of church government. We often
have said that “we are a grass-roots church”. The power flows from the
bottom-up and not from the top-down. The basic premise is that we govern by
the consent of the people. The _BCO_ sought to state these principles as they
apply to the relationship among the General Assembly, the Presbytery, the
Session and the local congregation. Thus, under the _BCO_, these courts of the
PCA have a spiritual/moral (ecclesiastical) relationship with one another but
have no civil authority toward one another. Thus the higher court may not
proceed in such a way that would ultimately require civil action against the
local congregation without a formal vote of the congregation. The General
Assembly has, on 2 occasions, by overwhelming majority votes, approved
and adopted the Ad Interim Committee’s Summary of the Philosophical and
Theological basis for PCA structure, which affirmed these principles, to-wit:

(1) A higher court may not “act for” a lower court.
(2) A higher court may “act on” an issue or case.
(3) A higher court, as a last resort, may “act against” the
lower court by dismissing it from the fellowship.

The 14 [th] General Assembly (GA Minutes 14 [th] Assembly page 104-105)
approved this statement defining the relationship between the courts of
PCA, to-wit:

“The courts of PCA have a spiritual/moral relationship
with one another with regard to their separate
responsibilities, authority, responsibility, or accountability
but they have no civil authority, responsibility, or
accountability toward one another even though each of
them does have a civil relationship with the state with
regard to their property, charters of incorporation, and
other state and/or federal laws. The higher courts may not
proceed in such away that would constitute a civil action
on behalf o fa congregation without a formal vote of the
congregation. in order to be effective, any such civil action
must be with the consent or approval of the congregation,
which consent or approval is given in accordance with the
civil laws under which the congregation is organized. . .

a higher court may no tact fora lower court.

Act for - a higher court taking an action o na matter
over which the lower court had original jurisdiction,
which action is as conclusive of the matter as if it had
been made by the lower court and similar is
enforceable by resort to the civil courts if necessary”

Hence, PCA deliberately chose the more democratic form of
representative church government as opposed to the more aristocratic or
hierarchical form. This choice is expressed by the language that PCA
chose to be governed by the voluntary consent of the people. This choice
is clearly reflected in _BCO_ Chapter 25-7 through 25-12. Perhaps the
clearest statement is in _BCO_ 25-11: “The relationship is voluntary,
based upon mutual love and confidence, and i sin no sense to be
maintained by the exercise of any force or coercion whatsoever.” JRP
erred in refusing to grant in a timely manner the constitutional request of
WEPC to dissolve its relationship with TE Robert Wilson.

**POINT 5- PRIOR RELATED ACTIONS OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY**
_BCO_ 14-7 speaks to “actions of the General Assembly . . . such as
deliverances, resolutions, overtures and judicial decisions are to be given
due and serious consideration by the Church and its lower courts when
deliberating matters related to such action.”

Notice this _BCO_ provision does not say that General Assembly actions
on overtures or judicial decisions are binding on the Church. As to
judicial decisions it states that such “shall be binding on the parties who
are directly involved in the matter being adjudicated and may be
appealed to in subsequent similar cases as to any principle which may
have been decided.”

In view of this principle, we “appeal” to two General Assembly actions
on judicial cases and one General Assembly action on an overture.

**Case No. 1**

**BRUCE NICKOLEY AND DAVID STEPHENS**

**VS.**

**SOUTHWEST PRESBYTERY**

**JUDICIAL CASE NO. 91-2**

1992 G.A. Minutes Page 142 et seq.

**FACTS:**

The congregation of Covenant P.C., Wheat Ridge, Colorado, met on
September 8, 1990, and the congregation voted to:
“ask Presbytery to dissolve the relationship between Pastor
Mike Pollock and this congregation. . .”

At Presbytery’s September 26-27, 1990 meeting, it appointed a
commission with this power:
“That the commission have the power to dissolve the
pastoral relationship between Covenant P.C. and TE Mike
Pollock which would include the authority to call a

congregational meeting to reconsider the action of the
previous congregation meeting to dissolve the pastoral
relationship.”

This commission met “a number of times: during the fall of 1990. The
commission set up a series of meetings with the express purpose of seeking
reconciliation without judicial process. By the time the commission
reported to Southwest Presbytery at its January 31-February 1, 1991
meeting Pastor Mike Pollock had transferred his ministerial credentials
to another denomination. Hence the commission recommended to
Presbytery that it consider as “moot” the issue of its proper action in
delaying the request of Covenant P.C. to dissolve the relationship of the
Church and TE Mike Pollock as presented at Presbytery’s meeting on
September 26-27, 1990. Presbytery adopted its Commission’s
recommendations. Bruce Nickoley and David Stephens complained.

The Standing Judicial Commission of PCA approved the
recommendation of its Judicial Panel and the 1992 General Assembly
approved the Judgment of the SJC.

In its Reasoning and Opinion of the SJC approved by the PCA General
Assembly we find this reasoning:

“However, despite the fact that the pastor did not request
that the pastoral relation be dissolved it may be noted that
the Southwest Presbytery acted correctly to dissolve the
pastoral relationship between it and TE Pollock and
Covenant P.C., Wheat Ridge, CO. The Presbytery received
from the congregation of Covenant P.C. a request that the
Presbytery dissolve the relationship between it and TE
Pollock and once they, in accordance with the _BCO_, had
exercised their discretion to determine that such a request
came out of a valid congregational vote, they acted
correctly to dissolve that relationship. . . the discretion
given to a Presbytery under _BCO_ 23-1 does not give a
Presbytery power to prevent the implementation of a valid
decision of a congregation. (Emphasis added) (G.A.
Minutes 1992, page 148).

We, thereby, invoke the provision of _BCO_ 14-7 that a prior judicial
decision “may be appealed to in subsequent similar cases as to any
principle which may have been decided.”

We make that appeal as a valid principle in this case.

**Case No. 2**

**VIRGIL B. ROBERTS**

**VS.**

**NEW RIVER PRESBYTERY**

**JUDICIAL CASE NO. 92-2**

1993 G.A. Minutes, page 199 et seq.

**FACTS:**

On August 21, 1991, TE Don Post, Pastor of Providence Presbyterian
Church (PRPC) tendered his resignation from the pastorate of the
church.

At a duly called congregational meeting on September 8, 1991, the
congregation, by a majority vote, voted to accept his resignation.
At the November 8-9, 1991 meeting of New River Presbytery, the
resignation was presented with the request that presbytery concur.

Presbytery’s Shepherding Committee had met, prior to the pastor’s
resignation, with him and the Church’s Session. At this Presbytery
meeting, the Shepherding Committee did not report or cite any reason
for Presbytery not concurring in the pastor’s resignation and the
Church’s request for concurrence.

Instead of concurring, Presbytery appointed a Commission “to inquire
into the circumstances regarding the propriety and orderliness of the
pastor’s resignation.”

At a December 9, 1991 called meeting of Presbytery, reported:

“That the Session of PRPC acted unwisely in that they (1)
moved with undue haste in requesting the resignation of
TE Post, and in calling a congregational meeting to vote
on the dissolution of the pastoral relationship with TE Post
and (2) mentioning information which they did not feel
free to discuss with the congregation.”

On November 25, 1991, RE Virgil Roberts of PRPC complained against
the failure of New River Presbytery to adopt this made and seconded
motion at its November 8, 1991 meeting to-wit:

“That the letter of resignation of TE Don Post, as pastor of
PRPC be accepted and the relation be dissolved.”

At the December 7, 1991 meeting of New River Presbytery, the
complaint was denied. RE Roberts, on December 23, 1991, filed his
complaint of this presbytery action with the Standing Judicial
Commission of PCA.

The SJC approved a decision of the Panel which held:

“The majority of the Panel notes that in a previous
decision in Case 91-2, the SJC and General Assembly
affirmed that the discretion given to a Presbytery under
_BCO_ 23-1 does not give Presbytery power to prevent the
implementation of a valid decision of the congregation.”
(1993 G.A. Minutes page 202) (emphasis added).

This SJC approved decision contained the following statement:

“That ‘valid decision of a congregation’ must be understood to
include both the election of pastor and the concurrence in his
resignation. The fundamental right of a congregation to elect its
officers was noted by Dr. Morton Smith in an article in his
Book, the Historical Birth of the PCA. he concluded that it is a
fundamental provision of our polity that the office bearers in the
Apostolic Church were chosen by the people. On this basis, we
may conclude that the function of pastors and teachers of
Ephesians 4:11 are included under the office of Elder.” (1993
G.A. Minutes page 202).

The 1993 General Assembly approved this judgment (1993 G.A.
Minutes page 200).

We, thereby, invoke the provision of _BCO_ 14-7, that a prior judicial
decision “may be appealed to in subsequent similar cases as to any
principle which may have been decided.”

We make that appeal as a valid principle in this case.

**ILLUSTRATION NO. 3**
**Overture to 2001 General Assembly**
**2001 General Assembly Minutes**
**Overture No. 4**
**From Eastern Carolina Presbytery**
**Pages 190-195**

Eastern Carolina Presbytery sent to the 2001 General Assembly an
Overture to amend _BCO_ 23-1 in relation to the dissolution of the
relationship between a pastor and a church.

The suggested change in _BCO_ 23-1 included the following language:

“. . . If the minister shall contest the requested dissolution,
both the church and its pastor shall be cited to appear
before the Presbytery to present their reasons for
dissolution and reasons for contesting the dissolution. Since
the bare fact that a majority of the members o fa particular
church desires to be relieved of its pastor is not per se a
sufficient ground for dissolution, the Presbytery must first
hear from the Church, then from the pastor to determine
whether the dissolution is consistent with the Word of God
in regard to the causes heard and would therefore be in the
interest of both parties.”

The argument made by Eastern Carolina Presbytery in support of the
Overture included these statements:

(1) “Dissolution of a pastoral bond is within the power of the
Presbytery only and is not a ‘rubber stamp’ action based solely on
the will of either the congregation or its pastor.”
(2) “Especially in regard to congregational requests for dissolution,
there is a growing sentiment within the PCA that the will of the
majority of the congregation shall prevail regardless of the issues
that led to the request. In other words a congregation, like a
democracy, is entitled to be relieved of its pastor simply if a
majority wishes it to be so, whatever the circumstances.” (1993
_G.A. Minutes_ page 192).

The General Assembly answered this overture in the negative. In effect,
the General Assembly did not agree with the above arguments of the
proponents of the proposed change in _BCO_ 23-1. The General Assembly,
in effect, stated that it was in agreement with the current _BCO_ 23-1.
Following our present _BCO_ provisions, we conclude that James River
Presbytery had no constitutional issue before its presbytery meetings of
April 21, 2001, that would empower JRP to delay granting a proper
constitutional request from WEPC to dissolve the relationship between
WEPC and its pastor. JRP erred in failing to do so.

3 **.** **JRP’S GIFT OF ITS FUNDS TO TE ROBERT C. WILSON**

C 23-01 and C 24-01 were complaints by ruling elders of the Session of
WEPC. The basis of their complaints was that WEPC had contributed a
portion of those funds to JRP and JRP did not have constitutional
authority to give them away without permission of the Session of

WEPC. But JRP acting through its civil authority to give some of its
property (money) to TE Robert C. Wilson was a civil action over which
no higher or lower court had any control.

It should be remembered that in PCA the local church, the presbytery
and the General Assembly are separate legal entities with each having
civil powers. To exist as legal entities in our American Society, they
each must be a civil entity with separate civil functions. Each such civil
entity can own its own property, have its own employees, and perform
all separate civil functions.

There is an ecclesiastical connection among the various courts of PCA
with the higher court having, by virtue of their ecclesiastical power,
authority over the lower courts.

But there is no civil connection between or among the civil entities
of the local church, Session, presbytery or G.A. in the PCA.
The Ad Interim Committee on Structure reported its
recommendations to two separate General Assemblies in the
1980's. These recommendations were approved by both General
Assemblies.

One of the concluding paragraphs in its reports was as follows:

“The courts of the PCA have a spiritual/moral relationship
with one another with regard to their separate
responsibilities, authority, and accountability; but they have
no civil authority, responsibility, or accountability toward
one another even though each of them does have a civil
relationship with the State with regard to their property,
charters of incorporation, and other state and/or federal
laws. The higher court may not proceed in such a way that
would constitute civil action on behalf of a congregation
without the formal vote of the congregation. in order to be
effective, any such civil action must be made with the
consent or approval of the congregation, which consent or
approval is given in accordance with the civil laws under
which the congregation is organized.”

Similarly, the General Assembly has no power or authority to order,
instruct, tell or coerce JRP to cancel or rescind its civil action to give
some of its property (money) to TE Robert C. Wilson. If this civil action

was taken by JRP in a proper and constitutional manner, no ecclesiastical
court of PCA can change or challenge this civil decision of JRP.

Therefore, the Complainants in C 23-01 and C 24-01 had no
constitutional authority to complain to the ecclesiastical court of the
General Assembly, namely the Standing Judicial Commission, against a
civil action taken by the civil entity of JRP because there is no civil
connection between the civil entity of JRP and the civil entity of the
General Assembly of PCA.

To have this governing principle and concept to be fully understood and
embraced was the goal of those founding fathers who wrote and adopted
the PCA _Book of Church Order_ .

The original Statement of the Issues and Judgment in the Case were prepared
by the three Panel Members while they were together immediately after the
Oral Hearing.

The original Reasoning and Opinion was drafted by W. Jack Williamson
with the concurrence of Dr. Robert M. Ferguson and Dr. M.C.
Culbertson.

The final decision was written by the full SJC at the October, 2004
meeting.

Respectfully submitted, Dr. W. Jack Williamson

The vote on the Cases 2001-34, 2002-2, and 2002-3 was:
TE Dominic A. Aquila Recused RE J. Grant McCabe Concur
TE Howell A. Burkhalter Concur TE Charles E. McGowan Concur
TE Stephen M. Clark Concur TE D. Steven Meyerhoff Concur
RE M. C. Culbertson Dissent REFrederick Neikirk Recused
RE Perry Denniston Concur RE Steven T. O’Ban Dissent
RE J. Howard Donahoe Absent TE Michael M. Rico Concur
RE Samuel J. Duncan Concur TE G. Dewey Roberts Concur
TE Robert M. Ferguson, Jr. Absent TE Michael F. Ross Concur
TE William W. Harrell Absent TE Robert D.Stuart Concur
Jr., RE Terry L. Jones Absent RE John Tolson Disqualified
TE Paul D. Kooistra Absent RE John B. White, Jr. Concur
RE Thomas F. Leopard Concur RE W. Jack Williamson Dissent
**Adopted** : 13 concurring, 3 dissenting, 1 disqualified, 2 recused, 0 abstained,
and 5 absent.
Approved by the full Standing Judicial Commission on October 22, 2004.

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
