# Case 2007-14 — Case 2007-14: m. BCO 39-3(3) does not require great deference absent clear error, because the issue of TE Moon’s clear heterodoxy does not involve any the types of questions that BCO 39-3(3) invokes – his moral cha

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 39th (2011)  ·  **Disposition:** —  ·  **Dissent:** yes  ·  **BCO cited:**  39-3 31-2 32-2 32-3 31-8 34-1 34-4 32-20 

*Source: [ga39_2011 pp. 592–595](../markdown/ga39_2011.md)*

---

k. We as a Court of the Lord Jesus Christ should not ignore plain
heterodoxy under the rubric of deferring to the Lower Court –
with due respect to this Court’s Decision. This is not a matter of
the Presbytery making findings on the credibility of TE Moon, to
which deference would be owed -- because no trial was held. It
wa snot a matter of hearing witness x and witness y and
believing one, while disbelieving the other. Rather, it was a
matter of two conflicting sets of statements by TE Moon, and the
plain meaning of each to be properly interpreted. Nor is this a
matter of ambiguity in his views, which this Court’s Decision
argues should be “interpreted in an orthodox fashion” because of
the “judgment of charity.” Rather, it is a fundamental principle of
law that when statements are unambiguous, which in my view te
Moon’s are, a Court of this Church is not free to do creative
interpretations of them.
l. To countenance TE Moon’s protestations that he is within the
_Standards_ or traditions, given his objective statements to the
contrary, would in my view be entirely analogous to Louisiana
Presbytery’s countenancing Rev. Wilkins’ protestations for years
that he did not intend to be heterodox or outside the _Standards_ –
which Louisiana Presbytery eventually pled guilty to and was
properly admonished for in Case 2007-14.

- **m.** _BCO_ 39-3(3) does not require great deference absent clear error, because the issue of TE Moon’s clear heterodoxy does not involve any the types of questions that _BCO_ 39-3(3) invokes – his moral character, appropriate censures, or credibility of conflicting witnesses. The question is simply one of interpreting his unambiguous statements of his own beliefs, the two of which quoted above are clearly at odds with two of the 9 declarations of the Ad Interim Committee on Federal Vision cited.
- **n.** Some of my critics have said I should have brought up all of these objections at the SJC conference, and not saved them for public criticism. Brethren, I apologize for not having all these points written up in advance, for perhaps not thinking fast enough in conference, and for any other flaws that may appear in this

Dissent. The only mitigating factor I might offer, although I
respect the fact that a Court’s conferences are traditionally
confidential, is that i sen tout to all my brethren a “Concurring
Opinion,” this past July, concurring with the then-majority panel
Proposed Decision, explaining why I did not agree with the thendissent, which has now with amendments become the Majority

Opinion, and would repeat now what I trust most of my Brethren
may recall my having essentially said before: the question of
evidentiary sufficiency on a summary proceeding is not
determined by a preponderance, or let’s say over 50% of the
evidence, because by definition a summary proceeding does not
allow all the evidence to be presented. A _BCO_ 31-2 investigation
and determination of strong presumption of guilt is by its very
nature a “summary proceeding.” That is to say, even if TE
Moon’s unambiguous statements of belief offended only one of
the Ad Interim Committee’s 9 points summarized above, it would
require a finding of strong presumption of guilt.

2. The Court says, “process against TE Moon could still be instituted by
some person or persons who would undertake to make out a proper
charge pursuant to _BCO_ 32-2. Upon such a charge being laid before
the Presbytery, the Presbytery must follow _BCO_ 32-3, subject to _BCO_
31-8.” My questions, concerns and disagreements about that are as
follows:

a. Why subject to _BCO_ 31-8, only, and not the entire chapter 31? It
is apparently the view of some that when a “proper charge” is
made under _BCO_ 32-2, the requirement is obviated to find a
“substantial presumption of guilt” (SPOG) under _BCO_ 31-2, but
rather that the Presbytery must proceed immediately with
process. [6]
b. Under this view, “process” is commenced _either_ by the making of
the charge _or_ an investigation and finding of SPOG, pursuant to
_BCO_ 32-2. I.e., the Court (Presbytery or Session) cannot consider
SPOG if a “charge” is made by someone other than the Court
itself.
c. I question whether this view is the plain meaning of _BCO_ 32-2.
The plain meaning, it seems to me, of _BCO_ 32-2 is to place a

6 Some may find this analysis confusing, or even think i am confused. I may be, or I
may be trying to explain something that is itself confusing. I have had it explained to
me that the language of _BCO_ 32-2 is old, archaic language, but, to the effect, “trust
me, however it’s actually worded, it really means that the determination of SPOG
does not apply when someone brings charges.” I respectfully submit, brethren, that
some of our translations of the _Bible_ itself contain old, archaic language too, but
under the Grammatical-Historical Method of Hermeneutics, we apply the plain
meaning of the words, unless the context requires otherwise. Terry, Milton (1974).
_Biblical Hermeneutics: a treatise on the interpretation of the Old and New_
_Testaments_ . Grand Rapids Mich.: Zondervan Pub. House. page 205.

gatekeeper before instituting unwarranted process against a
brother. That gatekeeper is the necessity of the Court finding a
SPOG.

- **d.** Why would a finding of SPOG be necessary when the Court makes its own investigation under _BCO_ 31-2, but not when someone other than the Court itself “mak[es] out the charge”? It seems to me that if a gatekeeper against unwarranted process against a brother is necessary when the Court itself investigates and formulates the charge, it would be all the more necessary when someone other than the Court itself formulates the charge.
- **e.** The view advanced by this Dissent, that a determination of SPOG is essential in all Cases prior to the institution of process, regardless of how originated, is supported by the fact that, e.g., pursuant to SJCM 16, when a case against a minister under _BCO_

34-1 comes to the SJC, the SJC is specifically directed to make a
determination of SPOG under SJCM 16.4 & 16.5, even though
_BCO_ 34-4 assumes that “charges” against the Minister have
already been made _._ _[7]_
f. Perhaps it is the view of some that the warnings of _BCO_ 31-8 are
an equivalent gatekeeper against unwarranted charges. But, I
submit, that is not the case, because _BCO_ 31-8 says nothing about
the validity of the charges. An accuser other than the Court itself
might not be barred by any of the cautions of _BCO_ 31-8, and yet
still present unwarranted charges.

7 I realize that it may be argued in response to the foregoing point in this subparagraph (e) -- but that’s the way we’ve always understood it -- but I would suggest
that, if that is the way we want it, it would be easier just to amend the _BCO_ to clarify
the issue. Those who say _BCO_ 32-2 says what, in my view, it clearly does not say
could easily propose an Overture saying something like “Process against an offender
shall not be commenced unless some person or persons undertake to make out the
charge ( _in which case an investigation and a determination of SPOG is not_
_necessary)_ ; or unless the Court finds it necessary, for the honor of religion, itself to
take the step provided for in _BCO_ 31-2” (with the suggested change indicated in
italics within the parentheses above. Our Baptist brethren say “baptized” always
means immersion, and can be applied only to believers, but also say 1 Cor. 10:2 is a
mystery – “all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea,” because they
refuse to deal with the plain meaning of the words and context -- that the “baptized”
believers walked dry through the parted sea, and it was only the unbelieving
Egyptians who got immersed when the sea resumed un-parted, in that situation with
Moses and the cloud and the sea. Ex. 14:19-29. Likewise, the majority has not dealt
with the plain meaning of _BCO_ 32-2 in this Decision.

g. The plain meaning of _BCO_ 32-2 is not that a determination of
SPOG is obviated when someone other than the Court itself
“mak[es] out the charge.” Rather, the subject of _BCO_ 32-2 is
when process “shall _not_ be commenced.” It is not the subject of
_BCO_ 32-2 to dictate when process _must_ be commenced. It seems
a strained reading of _BCO_ 32-2 to exclude a determination of
SPOG under this paragraph, when the very paragraph
incorporates by reference the very section of the _BCO_, 31-2,
where the requirement for a determination of SPOG is mentioned.
h. There is no support for _the notion_ that reducing the charges to
writing obviates the need to investigate and make the SPOG
determination. The _notion_ creates two classes of offenses, one
that we know about because we’ve investigated it, but it’s still
unwritten ( _BCO_ 31-2); and the other being, we may or may not
know that much about it, but somebody has written it down and
given the writing to us ( _BCO_ 32-2 & -3). This, to me, sounds like
what our Courts in this country call “exalting form over
substance,” and which all our Courts reject. [8] I concede that the
Government Courts, which I have spent 37 years laboring in,
have no binding effect on this Church Court, but to me the logic
is compelling that we should not exalt form over substance. We
should, rather, deal with similar alleged offenses in a clear,
consistent way, giving different results, when the facts of the
alleged offenses are different, rather than different results based
on the often-obscure details of the procedures by which offenses
are handled.
i. This Court’s mandate that, “upon such a charge …, the
Presbytery must follow _BCO_ 32-3,” may suggest a roadmap to
those who might want another chance to pursue TE Moon in this
case. However, it seems to me, that suggestion would be more of
a dead-end street than a roadmap, because a Presbytery that
refused to find SPOG on a matter would be highly unlikely to
find guilt after a full trial on the same matter. Especially is this
true where, as here, the Complainants have taken the position that
they really did present written charges and the SLP refused to
prosecute them (Findings #11 &14 of the Summary of the Facts
in this Court’s instant Decision). Another problem with such a
“roadmap” is that, by the time a case such as this reaches a
Decision in the SJC, more than a year has transpired since the
alleged offenses, and the one-year bar of _BCO_ 32-20 would
normally apply.

8 E.g., _**Gregory v. Helvering**_, 293 U.S. 465 (1935).

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
