# Case 2009-07 — Urish v. Rocky Mountain Presbytery — M38GA, 2010 Nashville, p. 235. Not sustained 20-0. C-Op 3. Summary: Alleged P erred by ordaining a man who held that women could, under Session authority, do any teaching in a church other than preaching. (Interpretation of 1 Timothy 2:12) Issue: Did Rocky Mounta

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 38th (2010)  ·  **Disposition:** not_sustained  ·  **Vote:** 20-0  ·  **BCO cited:**  39-3 39-3.2 39-3.3 39-3.4 21-5.3 4-4 53-2 12.5.e 21-4.c.1.b 21-4.c.2 

*Source: [ga38_2010 pp. 235–244](../markdown/ga38_2010.md)*

---

(http:// www.pcahistory.org/pca/07-fvreport.pdf). The wording of Recommendation 3
is most pertinent here:

“Recommendation 3: That the GA recommends the [nine]
declarations in this report as a faithful exposition of the
Westminster Standards, and further reminds those ruling and
teaching elders whose views are out of accord with our Standards
of their obligation to make known to their courts any differences
in their views.”

Three points are worth noting:

1. While the majority of men at the 2007 Memphis GA believed these
were nine “faithful expositions” of the Standards, there is no
_constitutional_ requirement for men to agree with that conclusion - in
any of the nine instances. There is a crucial difference between the
men a ta single ga agreeing o nan exposition o fa confessional
paragraph, and the denomination amending the Constitution to
explicitly reflect that understanding. Otherwise, our confession could
be amended by majority vote at a single GA, rather than by the 3/43/4-3/4 required in _BCO_ 26-3. I’ll use an extreme example to make
this procedural point. _BCO_ 14-5 stipulates the quorum for GA is 50
TEs and 50 REs representing at least 1/3 of the Presbyteries. Let’s
say ag ai she l data relatively inconvenient city, where attendance is
low, and one hour before adjourning on Friday, a majority of the
quorums till present adopts a motion proclaiming it is a “faithful
exposition” of _WCF_ 24:1 to understand that marriage could be
between two consenting adults, not just between ama nan da woman.
(See also the SJC reasoning in Edgemont Session v. Westminster in
1997 dealing with the 16 [th] GA’s study on Freemasonry.)
2. While the majority of men at the 2007 Memphis GA voted in favor of
regarding the nine declarations as “faithful expositions” of the
Standards, each declaration only declared a certain view to be
“contrary to the Standards.” It did not declare any as being “hostile
to the system” or as “striking at the vitals of religion.” Presumably,
even if a Presbytery agreed with all nine declarations, and it was
examining a candidate who disagreed with all nine, they would still
need to determine whether each difference should be regarded as
HSD or SVR. It is important to also note the Ad-Interim Study
Committee was specifically tasked by the Atlanta GA “to determine
whether [certain] viewpoints and formulations… are hostile to or
strike at the vitals of religion.” However, the Committee (wisely) did

not recommend that any particular view be regarded as HSD or SVR
and the Memphis GA did not adopt anything declaring such.
3. In the second part of Recommendation 3, all elders are reminded to
“make known to their courts any differences” they have with our
_Standards_ . (This was already a well-known requirement in the PCA
– see _BCO_ 13-6, _BCO_ 21-4.f, RAO 16-3.e.5, and to a different extent,
the second part of ordination vow 2 in _BCO_ 21-5). But
Recommendation 3 did not say men are obligated to make known to
their courts differences they might have _with these nine declarations_
_of the 2007 Memphis GA._ The nine declarations are not themselves
part of our Standards.

There are over 32,000 words in the Westminster Standards, written over 350
years ago. Taken together, it is a magnificent document. Best of its kind. It
has been and remains an immeasurable blessing to the Church and critically
important in our role as teachers, pastors, examiners, and children of God.
Elders should know it well. But it shouldn’t be surprising that theologicallyrigorous men like us in the PCA might find some statements or propositions
with which we differ. Frankly, I wonder if there were any Westminster
divines who would have proclaimed, like many of our ministerial candidates,
“I have no difference with _any_ statement or proposition in the Standards.”
We sometimes forget it was a consensus document prepared over three years
and not every paragraph was adopted unanimously by the 60-120 men in
attendance for any particular vote.

Frequently, ordination candidates proclaim they have no differences with any
statement and proposition in the Standards. But do they really agree, for
example, with the quasi-Erastian view that holds the civil magistrate should
use tax money to pay the salaries of the ministers? (LC 191:“In the second
petition [Lord’s Prayer]… we pray, that… the church (be)… _countenanced_
_and maintained_ by the civil magistrate…”) Do they really agree that God still
makes himself known through “lots” and that these are valid and appropriate
for Christians? (LC 112: “The 3 [rd] commandment requires, that … _lots_ … and
whatsoever else there is whereby he makes himself known, _be holily and_
_reverently used_ …” - citing Acts 1:24-26.) Faithfulness and fidelity to the
Standards, and a firm and passionate embrace of their teachings, is not
necessarily synonymous with “no exceptions.”

Conclusion

The SJC gives two “directions” to Pacific Northwest Presbytery at the end of
the decision, but they are confusing. The first direction references _BCO_ 31-7,

but that paragraph only applies _after_ an indictment. It begins, _“When the_
_prosecution is instituted by the court . . . ”_ The first direction also says
Presbytery “may counsel TE Leithart that the views set forth above constitute
error that is injurious to the peace and purity of the church . . .” But the SJC
never rendered such a judgment on any of his views. So the first amends is
not coherent and it is unclear what is meant by the seemingly-optional “ _may_
counsel.” And the second “direction” from the SJC is contingent on the first.

Nineteen years ago, the SJC identified two specific Jenga Sticks in another
case – limited atonement and infant baptism (Bowen vs. Eastern Carolina).
That clear identification has served the PCA well. Candidates know it.
Examining courts know it. Most of our congregants know it. In this case, the
SJC was asked to rule on the dispute between the complainants and
Presbytery over whether any of a minister’s views were Jenga Sticks. If SJC
believed any views were Jenga Sticks, instead of indirectly critiquing them,
the court should have:

(1) clearly identified them,
(2) clearly explained how and where they differed from the
Standards, and
(3) clearly explained why the court judged them to be hostile to
the system or striking at the vitals of religion.

RE Howard Donahoe

1 At the time of this Objection, Leithart’s 32-page Response from the Record
could also be found at http://www.leithart.com/pdf/Response-to-PresbyteryCommittee-Reports.pdf

**CASE 2009-7**

**TE JAMES URISH VS. ROCKY MOUNTAIN PRESBYTERY**

**I.** **SUMMARY OF FACTS**

1. Rocky Mountain Presbytery examined Mr. Dan Breed for ordination
at the January 2009 Stated Meeting. During the candidate’s theological
examination, he was questioned about views he had expressed in his
written theological examination as to the role a woman may play in
the life of the church. Specifically, the candidate wrote:

Women and men in the church are able to teach, mentor,
lead, administer, and counsel men and women as is seen

in the New Testament, under the oversight of the elders
(Romans 16:1-12). The office of elder is reserved only
for men as having spiritual authority in the New
Testament and therefore ruling authority in the Church
(Titus 1:5-9, 1 Timothy 2:12-13. 13:1-7)[sic].

2. Presbyters questioned the candidate as to the extent of his
view (what is allowed) and the basis for his view (his Biblical
exegesis). He stated:

- **a.** The role of elder is only for men;
- **b.** He would allow a woman to teach the book of Romans to a Sunday school including men, under the authoritative supervision of the church session;
- **c.** Women and non-ordained men teach under the authority and supervision of the church session;
- **d.** A woman is not allowed to exercise spiritual authority over the church in her teaching; that role is reserved to the elders;
- **e.** Preaching is an example of teaching with authority;
- **f.** 1 Tim. 2:11-12 does not allow a woman to “teach authoritatively” (i.e. preach); but it does not preclude her from all forms of teaching, so long as she teaches under the supervision and authority of the church session;
- **g.** 1 Tim. 2:11-12 precludes one thing, “teaching authoritatively,” not two things “teaching” and “having authority.”

3. Upon motion, Rocky Mountain Presbytery voted to sustain
the candidate’s theological exam. There was no motion
challenging the view expressed by the candidate as to the
permissibility of a woman teaching. Presbytery subsequently
voted to approve the candidate for ordination.

4. February 20, 2009, Complainants filed a Complaint against
“the action of the Rocky Mountain Presbytery in connection
with its sustaining the theological and ordination
examination” of the candidate on January 23, 2009. Rocky
Mountain Presbytery denied the complaint at its April 2009
Stated Meeting. Complainants then brought this matter to the
General Assembly.

**II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUE**

Did Rocky Mountain Presbytery err in sustaining a candidate for ordination’s
theological examination when that candidate would in various ministries
of the church, exclusive of preaching, allow a woman to teach from
Scripture to men and women, all under the authority of the Session?

**III. JUDGMENT**

No.

**IV. REASONING AND OPINION**

Before reviewing the presbytery’s decision in this matter, we must first
determine the standard of review by which we are to evaluate a
presbytery’s decision to grant certain latitude in the interpretation and
application of a passage of Scripture that is not authoritatively exposited
by our doctrinal standards or our _Book of Church Order_ . _BCO_ 39 sets
forth standards for appellate review, such as:

(1) the higher court is to give “great deference” to the lower court
with regard to “factual matters” and with regard to certain “matters
of discretion and judgment” and should disturb the lower court’s
decision only upon a finding of “clear error” ( _BCO_ 39-3.2, 3.3);

or
(2) the higher court, in cases involving the interpretation of the
Constitution, “has the duty and authority to interpret and apply
the Constitution of the Church according to its best abilities and
understanding, regardless of the opinion of the lower court.”
( _BCO_ 39-3.4).

The _BCO_ authorizes no other applicable standard of review.

The parties to this case concede that neither the Westminster Standards
nor the _Book of Church Order_ explicitly address the candidate’s view in
this case. Thus the crucial question in determining if there is clear error
that would lead to a reversal of the lower court ( _BCO_ 39-3.3) is whether
the man’s views are out of conformity with “the general principles of
Biblical polity” embodied in our Constitution ( _BCO_ 21-5.3). In
considering this question, the critical issues for the court of original
jurisdiction are (1) whether the candidate’s interpretation of Scripture
undermines the credibility of his commitment to the first ordination vow
and (2) the allowable applications of practice that may flow from that
interpretation.

While many of us have questions about the candidate’s exegesis of I
Timothy 2:11-15, we do not find sufficient evidence in the record or
arguments to require the conclusion that Presbytery erred in not finding
the expressed views call into question his ability to affirm the first
ordination vow. Further, the candidate in this case expressly rejected the
following – that a woman could serve as an elder; that a woman could
preach in public worship; and, that a woman could teach the Scriptures in
any church ministry context outside of the express oversight and
authoritative governance of the church session. With these express
limitations of a woman’s role in place, the presbytery examined the
candidate as to the basis for his exegesis of I Tim. 2:11ff – essentially that
Paul forbids “authoritative teaching” (such as preaching), and does not
prohibit other forms of teaching that may occur in the ministry life of the
church (Sunday school, small groups, breakfast meetings, seminars, etc.).
At the conclusion of a discussion of his view, presbytery voted to sustain
his theological exam. There was no motion made to find his view as to a
woman teaching out of accord with our system of doctrine.

Applying the above standards to the matter before us, we find no basis in
the Record of the Case to conclude that the presbytery committed clear
error in affirming the theological examination of the candidate at issue.
We find, therefore, no constitutional basis to set aside the judgment of the
presbytery and so affirm its denial of the Complaint.

This Decision was amended by the full Standing Judicial

Roll call vote on 2009-7:
TE Dominic A. Aquila, Disqualified TE William R. Lyle, Concur
TE Howell A. Burkhalter, Concur RE J. Grant McCabe, Concur
RE E.C. Burnett, Concur TE Charles E. McGowan, Concur
TE David F. Coffin Jr., Concur TE D. Steven Meyerhoff, Concur
RE Marvin C. Culbertson, Concur TE Timothy G. Muse, Concur
RE J. Howard Donahoe, Concur RE Frederick J. Neikirk, Concur
RE Samuel J. Duncan, Concur RE Jeffrey Owen, Concur
TE Fred Greco, Concur RE Calvin Poole, Absent
TE Grover E. Gunn III, Concur TE G. Dewey Roberts, Concur
RE Terry L. Jones, Concur TE Danny Shuffield, Concur
RE Thomas F. Leopard, Concur RE John B. White Jr., Concur

20 Concur, 1 Disqualified, 1 Absent

#### CONCURRING OPINION

**CASE 2009-07 – URISH**

**VS.**

**ROCKY MOUNTAIN PRESBYTERY**

**RE HOWARD DONAHOE, JOINED BY TE GRECO AND RE**
**DUNCAN**

I concur with the Judgment but want to add some qualifying comments to the
Reasoning. (All emphasis and underlining is added in this concurrence.)

Issue: Did Rocky Mountain Presbytery err in sustaining a candidate for
ordination’s theological examination when that candidate would, in various
ministries of the church (exclusive of preaching), allow a woman to teach
from Scripture to men and women, all under the authority of the Session?

Judgment: No

Most of the discussion in this case, and in the Record, involved the
interpretation of Paul’s prohibition about teaching in 1 Timothy 2:12 (ESV
below):

i do not permit a woman to teach or to exercise authority o vera
man; rather, she is to remain quiet.

The parties agreed Paul prohibits a woman from preaching, at least. But the
specific question was whether a woman is also prohibited from teaching the
book of Romans, for example, in a mixed-gender adult Sunday school class.
The Westminster Standards do not directly address that specific question and
there is some range of opinion in the PCA. In addition, the parties agreed the
_BCO_ does not explicitly prohibit a woman from such teaching. With regard
to preaching, however, the _BCO_ was amended in 2002 to add a single word
that explicitly prohibits women from preaching:

The Session . . . has power . . . to ensure that the Word of God is
preached only by such men as are sufficiently qualified ( _BCO_ 4-4,
53-2, 1 Timothy 2:11-12). _BCO_ 12.5.e

So until and unless the PCA amends the _BCO_ to likewise prohibit women
from teaching mixed adult classes, the higher court is not likely to overturn a
decision of a lower court on this specific question.

But further comment is warranted on an exegetical error made by the
candidate in this case. SJC writes: “ . . . many of us have questions about the
candidate’s exegesis of 1 Timothy 2:11-15 . . .” i believe that is a gracious

understatement. The candidate claimed only one thing is prohibited by 1 Tim
2:12, that is, “authoritative teaching” - not two things: teaching and having
authority. He claimed it was a hendiadys (two words connected by a
conjunction that convey one idea). While the transcript in the Record
indicates he was questioned about how he would apply this understanding,
there is little evidence of questioning about the exegesis itself. But this is an
exegetical error on a very important passage - and very few scholars hold this
view. Personally, if i was a pres byte r voting o nan ordination exam, this error
in exegesis would lead me to either (1) support a motion to postpone the vote
until he had studied the matter further, or (2) vote against sustaining his exam
on “knowledge of Greek” ( _BCO_ 21-4.c.1.b, or perhaps for exegesis paper if 1
Tim 2:12 had been assigned, per 21-4.c.2).

The view that Paul is prohibiting only one thing was soundly critiqued by
Andreas Kostenberger in his 1995 article “A Complex Sentence: The Syntax
of 1 Timothy 2:12” in chapter 3 of Women in the Church: An Analysis and
Application of 1 Timothy 2:9-15 (Baker Academic, 1st edition 1995, 2nd
edition 2005). www.cbmw.org/images/articles_pdf/kostenberger_andreas/
syntactical1tim2_12.pdf

The hendiadys view was argued 22 years ago by Philip Barton Payne in an
unpublished paper presented at the 1988 meeting of the Evangelical
Theological Society. In 2000, it was argued by Linda Belleville in her book
_Women Leaders in the Church: Three Critical Questions_ (Baker 2000). But
the argument failed to persuade many scholars. (I don’t know if Belleville’s
position has changed in her new 1 Timothy commentary in the Cornerstone
series, Tyndale House 2009. But see Kostenberger’s review of Belleville at
www.cbmw.org/ Resources/Book-Reviews/Teaching-and-Usurping Authorityby- Linda-L-Belleville-from-Discovering-Biblical-Equality.)

Payne’s arguments appeared again in the April 2008 journal New Testament
Studies. (Kostenberger’s critique of Payne’s article appeared in the fall 2009
_Journal of Biblical Manhood and Womanhood_ - www.cbmw.org/Journal/Vol-14No-2/The-Syntax-of-1-Timothy-2-12-A-Rejoinder-to-Philip-BPayne). The view
might also be hinted at by Hughes in his 2000 Crossways commentary. And
based on an online review of Payne’s new book ( _Man and Woman, One in_
_Christ_, Zondervan 2009), Blomberg might now be leaning toward this view.

But almost all commentators on 1 Timothy, complementarian and egalitarian
alike, agree with the “two activities prohibited” exegesis. Here is a representative
dozen:

Guthrie, Tyndale NT 1957&96 Fee, NIBC 1984 & 88
Knight, NIGTC 1992 IH Marshall, ICC 1999&2004
Liefield, NIV Applic 1999 LT Johnson, Anchor 2001
Mounce, WORD 2000 R. Collins, NT Library 2002
Towner, NICNT 2006 Quinn+Whacker, Eerdman’s 2006
Fiore, Sacra Pagina 2007 Ryken, Reformed Expos 2007

Here’s an excerpt from one complementarian:

For the grammatical structure that is used in this verse, the Greek
language insists on having either two words in positive
connotation or two words with negative connotation. (Ryken)

But even egalitarian scholars agree Paul is prohibiting two things, not just
one. (See Giles, Hartenstein, Keener, Marshall, Pagett, and Webb.) While
egalitarian scholars come to different conclusions about what is being
prohibited, few believe it is only one thing. Consider this excerpt from Marshall:

Kostenberger has argued convincingly on the basis of a wide range
of Gk. usage that the construction employed in this verse is one in
which the writer expresses the same attitude (whether positive or
negative) to both of the items joined together by oude [or]. It
follows that if ‘teaching’ is regarded positively, so also is ‘having
authority’, and that if ‘teaching’ is regarded negatively, so also is
‘having authority’. Since, in Kostenberger’s view, ‘teaching’ is a
positive activity, it follows that ‘having authority is also a positive
activity, and therefore the writer is denying two positive activities
to women. (Marshall goes on to argue for the ‘negative activity’
interpretation.)

And even though egalitarians have various reasons for disregarding Paul’s
prohibitions today (below), most still agree with Kostenberger that Paul was
clearly prohibiting two things:

Paul is simply wrong – PK Jewett
Prohibition is temporally restricted – Fee
Applies only to some of the Ephesian women – Bassler, Kroeger,
Marshall, Towner
Applies only to uneducated Ephesian women – AB Spencer
Applies only to wives – R. Collins
Galatians 3:28 overrides whatever 1 Tim 2:12 says – Hove

In conclusion, i believe it would b ea mistake to believes jc was “allowing”
or affirming the hendiadys exegesis of 1 Tim 2:12. That specific question
was not under review. While there is reasonable debate about what “type” of
teaching is being prohibited and how it should be applied in local PCA
churches (the issue in this case), there is little scholarly debate on the
question: “Is only one thing being prohibited?” The answer to that question,
from scholars in every camp of the gender debate, is a resounding “No.”

**STANDING JUDICIAL COMMISSION**

**CASE 2009-11**

**TE LARRY EDISON, ET AL**
**VS. SOUTHWEST FLORIDA PRESBYTERY**

**I. SUMMARY OF FACTS**

1. At the stated meeting of SWFP on February 14, 2009 TE Bryan
Gregory was examined for admission to SWFP ( _BCO_ 13-6), which
examination was approved, he was received as a member of SWFP,
his call as Senior Pastor of Cypress Ridge Presbyterian Church was
approved, and a commission was appointed to install TE Gregory as
pastor of Cypress Ridge on May 3, 2009.
2. On February 26 a complaint signed by 22 members of Presbytery was
filed against SWFP “in connection with the sustaining of the
theological examination of minister Bryan Gregory. . . . We . . .believe
that the presbytery erred in sustaining the theological examination and
in approving the ministerial call of a man whose theological views . .
.are ‘out of accord’ with the fundamentals of our church’s doctrinal
standards, are ‘hostile to’ the system of doctrine contained in said
standards and ‘strike at the vitals of religion’. . . .”
3. This complaint was heard at a special meeting of SWFP held on
March 14. After hearing the complaint Presbytery went into closed
session and adopted a motion “to sustain the Complaint filed against
the actions of Presbytery in sustaining the theological exam of Mr.
Gregory. . . . (32 in favor and 22 opposed)” In addition Presbytery
adopted a motion “that because the SWFP erred in sustaining the
theological examination of T.E. Bryan Gregory, that T.E. Gregory be
sent back to pres byte ry as a whole in order to undergo a theological
reexamination.” In further motions Presbytery appointed a special
meeting on March 24 for the reexamination, requested TE Gregory to
appear, at Presbytery’s expense, and indefinitely delayed TE
Gregory’s installation.

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
