# Case 2009-10 — Woodward v. Western Carolina Presbytery

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 38th (2010)  ·  **Disposition:** sustained_in_part  ·  **BCO cited:**  31-2 38-1 27-5 40-2 13-9 15-1 15-2 24-7 24-10 41 

*Source: [ga38_2010 pp. 197–206](../markdown/ga38_2010.md)*

---

institute process (something the Commission was not authorized to do).
However, instituting process on the matter of behavior was deemed
unnecessary because RE Payne subsequently confessed to being guilty of
the offense for which the Presbytery through its Commission had found a
strong presumption of guilt, and he was censured.

The Inman Commission was not a “study committee” examining the issue
of race and IQ. It was an investigating commission tasked to fulfill the
first part of the duties of _BCO_ 31-2 and to render a finding on the
existence or absence of a strong presumption of guilt. It found a strong
presumption of guilt on the matter of how RE Payne held his views, but
not on the holding of those views, per se.

n essence, TE Hutchinson's complaint asserted Presbytery erred in not
finding a strong presumption of guilt with regard to views. On November
18, 2008, the complaint was sustained, which had the effect of reversing
the previous finding of the Commission/ Presbytery that there was not a
strong presumption of guilt on views. As a result of sustaining the
complaint on November 18, 2008, what the Presbytery found was that
there was a strong presumption of guilt against Mr. Payne regarding his
views and it should have then instituted judicial process under _BCO_ 31-2
and 32-3. This is emphasized by the Rev. F.P. Ramsay in his 1898
_Exposition of the_ _Book of Church Order_ :

And after an investigation is once originated, the court no longer
has discretion not to institute process if the investigation results
in raising a strong presumption of guilt of the accused. It
appears, then, that, after an investigation, the court must
always institute process, except where the court judges that the
investigation fails to result in raising a strong presumption of
guilt, and, of course, the court may institute process, even
when the members of the court believe that there is no guilt, if
they are persuaded that this is desirable for the vindication of
innocence or for other reasons. The sum of the matter is, that
the court has unlimited discretion (subject, as in all matters, to
the review of higher courts), only that it has not discretion to
raise by investigation a strong presumption of guilt and then
not institute process. (pp. 185-186)

The action of WCP on November 18, 2008 wa snot a declaration but a
finding under _BCO_ 31-2 with regard to presumption of guilt. The action
is not to be understood as a position statement of WCP other than

recognizing the authority of Presbytery to institute judicial process. In
essence the effect of the November 18, 2008 action is to take the
Presbytery back to August 2, 2008 where it had judicial authority over
Mr. Payne since it accepted the Reference from the Friendship
Presbyterian Church Session in this matter. In this case, since all matters
related to the 31-2 investigation and any subsequent judicial process were
Referenced to the Presbytery, it is the court of jurisdiction in judicial
process against RE Payne on this particular matter (and not his current
Session). However, if his Session requests the return of jurisdiction for
adjudication, it can be returned with the consent of Presbytery.

Once a _BCO_ 31-2 investigation has commenced, Presbytery cannot just
administratively "declare" that the allegedly-sinful view is out of accord
with the Constitution and a violation of Christian liberty. Granted,
Presbyteries sometimes declare certain views as being contrary to the
Constitution (as in some ordination exams). And in some rare instances,
they might declare that the candidate does not even have the Christian
liberty to hold the view, regardless of his demeanor in holding it
(assuming Presbytery demonstrates such prohibition from Scripture
and/or the Constitution). That is Presbytery’s right and responsibility.
But in this present case, Presbytery's declaration was tied directly to the
views of an RE under judicial investigation. In other scenarios (ones not
involving an investigation of alleged sin) a Presbytery would be
constitutionally free to adopt a statement related to a subject like race,
regardless of whether it co mesas a recommendation from a study
committee or as a motion from an individual presbyter. And, like other
decisions of the court, the adoption of such a statement would be an
action against which a Complaint could be filed. But that was not the
situation in this case.

On November 18, 2008, by proceeding immediately to declare Mr.
Payne’s view out of accord with the Constitution and a violation of
Christian liberty, they denied him due process. Again, this SJC ruling is
not expressing any opinion on whether the indictment against Mr. Payne
and his views is warranted. It is simply ruling that commencing process
is the proper procedure for Presbytery to follow once they ruled there was
a strong presumption of guilt on the matter of views.

This Decision was drafted by the Panel (Dominic Aquila, Howard Donahoe,
and Grover Gunn) and amended by the full Standing Judicial Commission.

Roll call in 2009-2:
TE Dominic A. Aquila, Concur TE William R. Lyle, Concur
TE Howell A. Burkhalter, Concur RE J. Grant McCabe, Concur
RE E.C. Burnett III, Disqualified TE Charles E. McGowan, Concur
TE David F. Coffin, Jr., Concur TE D. Steven Meyerhoff, Concur
RE Marvin C. Culbertson, Concur TE Timothy G. Muse, Concur
RE J. Howard Donahoe, Concur RE Frederick J. Neikirk, Concur
RE Samuel J. Duncan, Concur RE Steven T. O’Ban, Absent
TE Fred Greco, Concur RE Jeffrey Owen, Concur
TE Grover E. Gunn III, Concur RE Calvin Poole, Concur
TE William W. Harrell Jr., Concur TE G. Dewey Roberts, Concur
RE Terry L. Jones, Concur TE Danny Shuffield, Concur
RE Thomas F. Leopard, Disqualified RE John B. White Jr., Concur

21 Concur, 2disqualified, 1 absent

**CASE 2009-05 COMPLAINT OF TE MARTIN PAYNE**

**2009-08 COMPLAINT OF JAMES R. LINTON,**
**2009-09 COMPLAINT OF KIRK D. LYONS, AND**
**2009-10 COMPLAINT OF ROBERT C. WOODWARD**

**VS.**

**WESTERN CAROLINA PRESBYTERY**

**I. SUMMARY OF FACTS**

This Complaint alleges Presbytery erred when it did not find a strong
presumption of guilt of TE Craig Bulkeley, pastor of Faith Presbyterian
Church, Black Mountain, NC. Complainants also contend _BCO_ 31-2 was
violated by an alleged undue delay in investigation and because the
accusers were not interviewed by Presbytery’s investigating committee.

In 2008, the church had a four-man Session composed of TE Bulkeley
and REs Payne, Linton and Pellom. Conflict arose primarily between TE
Bulkeley and RE Payne regarding Payne’s views related to race and IQ
and some material Payne had circulated. Eventually, there was a
congregational meeting on June 1, 2008 where a motion was adopted to
dissolve RE Payne’s call. The four-man Session referred this and other
matters to Presbytery per _BCO_ 41, which Presbytery accepted on June 17
and formed a Commission to fulfill the Session’s duties of _BCO_ 24-10

and 31-2.

June 1 Congregational meeting. Votes against dissolving the call of TE
Bulkeley. Votes to ask the Session to dissolve the call of RE Payne.

June 17 Presbytery called meeting (1 hour 23 minutes). in response to a
Reference from the Session, Presbytery appointed a _BCO_ 15-1
Commission (chaired by TE Inman) to conduct _BCO_ 31-2
investigations of reports on several individuals (including two TEs
and two REs) and to determine whether or not there is a strong
presumption of guilt.

July 15 Inman Commission acted on the first two of its four assignments,
which included their finding that there was a strong presumption of
guilt for RE Payne in the manner in which he held his views, and for
TE Bulkeley “in that he has failed to adorn the profession of the
Gospel in his manner of life, and to walk with exemplary piety before
the flock of which God has made him an overseer, contrary to his
ordination engagements ( _BCO_ 21-5.7).”

Commission’s Rationale: Without in any way diminishing an
understandable concern to correct error and dissociate both the gospel
and the church from the opprobrium and odium attaching to racist
views and practices, TE Bulkeley published his disagreement with a
fellow elder far and wide, both in Internet correspondence and in
conference with others, despite counsel to the contrary, without
applying the directives of Matthew 18 and the provisions of _BCO_ 275. An elder must set an example in both speech and conduct (1
Timothy 4:12; WLC 129), neither of which requirements TE
Bulkeley has fulfilled in addressing his concerns surrounding RE
Payne’s views, thus failing to avoid such things as procure an ill name
for himself and others (WLC 145)”.

Aug 2 Presbytery Stated Meeting. Prior to Presbytery instituting process
based on the Commission’s finding, TE Bulkeley confessed and
Presbytery handled it as a case without process per _BCO_ 38-1.
Presbytery voted to impose the censure of admonition on TE
Bulkeley, having been “satisfied with his repentance.” (RE Payne
also confessed per _BCO_ 38-1 and he was indefinitely suspended from
office.) Bulkeley’s confession is below:

I, Craig Bulkeley, intend to confess my guilt, and I
approve this confession of guilt to be a full statement
of the facts on the basis of which I intend to permit

Presbytery to render judgment without process, per
the provisions of _BCO_ 38-1.
Without in any way relinquishing my concern to
correct error and dissociate both the gospel and the
church from racism, with its ungodly contempt,
disrespect and scorn for those of different tribes and
tongues, i confess that i have published my
disagreement with a fellow elder, both in Internet
correspondence and in conference with others, far and
wide, despite counsel to the contrary, without
applying adequately the directives of Matthew 18 and
the provisions of _BCO_ 27-5. In this I have failed to
adorn the profession of the Gospel in my manner of
life, and to walk with exemplary piety before the
flock of which God has made me an overseer,
contrary to my ordination engagements. An elder
must set an example in both speech and conduct,
neither of which requirements have I fulfilled in
addressing my concerns surrounding the view of my
fellow elder, thus failing to avoid such things as may
procure an ill name for myself and others.

Aug 6 Session called meeting (the evening before congregational meeting).
Votes 2-1 to cancel the Aug 7 congregational meeting. TE Bulkeley
voted against cancellation.

Aug 7 Congregational meeting convened by TE Bulkeley.
REs Linton and Pellom not present. Among other things,
congregation votes to dissolve calls of REs Linton and Pellom and
ask Presbytery to fulfill the Session responsibility of _BCO_ 24-7 in
considering such requests to dissolve.

Aug 19 Presbytery called meeting (3 hours 16 min)
Present: 35 TEs & 25 REs
Motion to declare meeting out of order failed. Motion to find call in
order, passed 30-20. TE Bulkeley gave a “speech to Presbytery.” It
is not clear from minutes how this was delivered. He asked
Presbytery to find the Session’s actions on August 6 [seeking to
cancel the congregational meeting of Aug 7] to be “not wise,
equitable, or suited to promote the welfare of the Church, or in
accordance with the Constitution.” He also asks Presbytery to find
that the congregational meeting of August 7 was in order.

Presbytery took the following actions:

The actions of the Session at its called meeting on Aug 6
(regarding cancelling the congregational meeting the next day)
were deemed “to not be wise, equitable, suited to promote the
welfare of the church or in accordance with the Constitution.”

Motion was defeated that sought to cite Session to appear and
answer questions per _BCO_ 40-2 regarding a “credible report of
disorder.” Motion was also defeated that sought to have the
moderator appoint a committee to review the church’s records.

Took original jurisdiction under _BCO_ 13-9 to act on FPC request
to dissolve the relationship of REs Linton and Pellom.
Appointed a non-judicial commission per _BCO_ 15-1 & 2 to
“deliberate and act upon the congregation’s request for the
dissolution between REs Linton and Pellom under the provisions
of _BCO_ 24-7, paragraph 2.” Six men were appointed: TEs Sealy,
Bancroft, Osborne, REs Griffith, Leissing, and Maney (hereafter
called the Sealy Commission).

Postponed consideration of congregation’s call tote n evil leas
Associate until after the Sealy Commission reports.

Aug 19 (Same day as called Presbytery meeting)
Four page letter (hereafter, the “Grievance Letter) signed by 19
members of FPC addressed to Presbytery alleging things about their
pastor, TE Bulkeley, asking Presbytery to investigate per _BCO_ 31-2.
Signers included REs Linton and Pellom and members from seven
families: Linton (6), Lyons (5), Payne (3), Tate (2), Mahaffey,
Pellom, and Woodward. (The letter in the Record indicates it was
“modified with permission of signatories on Sep 11, 2008.”)

Six “illustrations” alleged that TE Bulkeley:
1. Convened an illegal congregational meeting on August 7. [later
an issue in Case 2008-15]
2. Violated the 9th commandment regarding giving church
membership roll to Session.
3. Violated the 9th commandment regarding a mailbox key, and
spread or allowed to be spread a rumor about the racial views of
Neill Payne.
4. Failed to control his wife’s speech and e-mail.

5. Abandoned pastoral functions: lack of attendance at Boy Scout
meetings and men’s prayer meeting, neglect of visitation, and
neglected to notify Session of death of an elder emeritus.
6. Caused [unspecified] further divisions in the church.

Sept 9 TE Martin Payne (pastor of Lakey Gap PCA in Black Mountain, NC,
about 3 miles from FPC) e-mails WCP clerk and moderator urging
attention to the Grievance Letter and its allegations. Also copies
Richard Hicks, TE Inman, TE Smith, RE Linton, Mr. Lyons, and.
Neill Payne (no relation to TE Payne).

Sept 10 WCP Clerk TE Gillikin responds with brief e-mail, copied to same men.

Sept 11 TE Payne e-mails again. Clerk responds that the matter would need
to wait until the Nov 7 stated meeting, unless the requisite number of
presbyters asked for a called meeting.

Nov 6 Bulkeley files with WPC Clerk a 10-page Response to Request for
Investigation (hereafter, RRI) asking Presbytery to “accept it as a
‘satisfactory explanation’ of the reports affecting my Christian
character and conclude that there is no strong presumption of guilt on
my part for the grievances therein.”

Nov 7 Presbytery Stated Meeting at Ridge Haven. Moderator appoints a sixman Committee (TE Basham convener) and referred to them several
items related to FPC to report later that meeting. The meeting
adjourned until Nov 18, with unfinished business, including
consideration of the Aug 19 Grievance Letter.

Nov 12 Letter from Kirk Lyons and Charles and Betty Tate, to WCP Clerk
asking that “charges against TE Bulkeley be acted on immediately.”
The two-page letter had 10 pages of attachments, and listed six items,
alleging that TE Bulkeley:

1. Initiated counseling with Charles and Betty Tate.
2. Humiliated the Tates from the pulpit.
3. Made tacit assumptions about the Tates and entered them in
Presbytery’s record.
4. TE Neville admitted Tates into membership 12 years ago.
5. From the pulpit, accused Kirk Lyons of asking him to lie in sermons.
6. Circularized presbyters with his rebuke of Kirk Lyons

Nov 14 E-mail from Robert Woodward, a member of FPC. In the Record, it
is addressed tore Linton, but the body of the e-mail addresses the
WCP Clerk. E-mail accuses TE Bulkeley of “spreading
misinformation about me and doing so in an unbiblical manner
(disregarding Matthew 18)” with regard to something Bulkeley wrote
in his Nov 6 RRI. He denied ever saying what Bulkeley alleged he
said in a conversation prior to the June 1 congregational meeting.

Nov 18 Continuation of Nov 7 Presbytery meeting, now at Covenant
Reformed Church. Among considering many other matters and
complaints related to FPC, Presbytery instructs Moderator to appoint
a Committee to investigate TE Bulkeley in accord with _BCO_ 31-2.

2009

Jan 5 WCP Moderator notifies presbyters by e-mail that he has appointed
the Bulkeley Investigation Committee (BIC).

Jan 9 BIC meeting 1 lasts one hour. Present were TEs Phillis (chair), Drake
& McGinn and REs Brown & Russell (RE Cook absent). BIC
minutes record “… all the documents pertaining to this matter, as
forwarded by the clerk of Presbytery, had been reviewed by the
committee members prior to the meeting.”

Jan 30 BIC meeting 2 lasts two hours ten minutes. All present, including TE
Bulkeley, who was dismissed halfway through the meeting. After
further discussion and upon motion, “the committee determined that
no strong presumption of guilt could be found with him regarding the
alleged grievances.”

Feb 28 Presbytery Stated Meeting at Dillingham PCA. TE Phillis reported
for BIC. Their report was titled “Attachment G” but is not in Record.
On motion, report of BIC was received and Presbytery accepted its
finding that there was not a strong presumption of guilt with regard to
the alleged grievances.

Mar 30 Four Complaints are filed with Presbytery Clerk.

TE Martin Payne files 23-page complaint with Presbytery, asking
Presbytery to:

1. Reconsider its finding of Feb 28 of no strong presumption of guilt.
2. Vote against BIC recommendation of no strong presumption of
guilt.

3. Refer the 31-2 investigation to the SJC.
4. Urge SJC to do “full eye-to-eye interviews with the 19 Aggrieved
Members of FPC.”
5. “Admit her fault of withholding due process from the 19
Aggrieved Members and make a sincere, public, Presbytery-infull-session apology to the 19.”
6. “Rebuke the BIC for their incomplete and poor adjudication of
this serious matter, and be dismissed without thanks.”

RE James Linton files a one-page “Complaint” with Presbytery,
signed only by him but indicating it was “on behalf of and with
permission of RE Pellom, Charles and Betty Tate, Neill Payne,
Elizabeth, Margaret and Duncan Linton, and others.” The Complaint
alleges the BIC failed to investigate the grievances fully, offering the
following reasons:

1. Complainants were denied due process in that they were not
contacted, consulted or allowed to give evidence in any fashion
before the BIC or Presbytery.
2. The BIC declined to receive proper evidence and thus failed in
their duty of due diligence as required by _BCO_ 31-2.
3. The BIC and Presbytery after delaying 5 months, hurried to a
decision before any evidence of the Complainants was taken.
4. In declining to hear the aggrieved parties, the BIC appears to
manifest extreme prejudice.
5. The judgment is manifestly unjust.
6. The decision was made without Christian love and in violation of

Matthew 18.
7. By denying the Complainants a proper and fair hearing, the
Committee is guilty of screening TE Bulkeley in his sin per
_BCO_ 34-2.

Kirk Lyons files one-page “Complaint” with Presbytery with 13
pages of attachments. He alleges Presbytery erred in accepting
the finding of the BIC on Feb 28 and in their “defacto denying the
charges of public sin” that he alleged in his letter of Nov 12. He
presented the following reasons:

1. He was given no opportunity to present evidence for the charges
he made in the Nov 12 letter.
2. He requested a formal hearing to present his evidence.

3. He was denied fundamental due process by not presenting his
evidence.
4. Presbytery and the BIC declined to receive proper evidence and
thus failed in their duty of due diligence required by _BCO_ 31-2.
5. Presbytery and BIC hurried to a decision before evidence was
taken.
6. Presbytery and BIC appears to manifest prejudice in declining to
hear evidence.
7. The judgment is manifestly unjust.
8. The decision was made without Christian love and in violation of

Matthew 18.
9. By denying Complainant a proper and fair hearing, the BIC is
guilty of screening TE Bulkeley in his sin per _BCO_ 34-2.

Robert Woodward files two-page “Complaint” with Presbytery,
alleging he was never given an opportunity to present his evidence or
to be heard (regarding his November 14 e-mail accusing TE Bulkeley
of spreading misinformation.) Items 2-9 in his complaint are the
same as in Kirk Lyons’.

May 5 Presbytery Stated Meeting at Arden PCA. A Judicial Business
Committee was appointed to consider and report (at this meeting)
recommendations on “Attachments B, C, D and E” – the four
complaints. JBC included TEs Kreitzer, Litchfield & Russ and REs
Roberson, Wilson & Cook (convener). Later in the meeting, RE Cook
reported for the JBC. A motion to rescind Presbytery’s action of Feb
28 (which did not find a strong presumption of guilt against
TE Bulkeley) failed by vote of 31-20 (i.e., 60%, but lacking the 2/3
required to rescind something previously adopted without prior
notice).

a motion to answer all four complaints by appointing anew
committee to examine the charges against TE Bulkeley giving all
parties a full hearing and reporting back to the next stated meeting of
Presbytery failed by a vote of 20-32. Separate motions to deny each
of the four complaints were then adopted by votes shown: Payne
(32-16). Linton (32-17), Lyons (31-17) and Woodward (34-18).

May 8 Payne complaint received by PCA. (2009-05)

May 19 Linton complaint received by PCA (2009-08).

May 26 Lyons complaint received by PCA (2009-09).
Woodward complaint received by PCA (2009-10).

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
