# Case 2014-01 — TE Don Aven and TE David Dively Ohio Valley Presbytery

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 44th (2016)  ·  **Disposition:** other  ·  **Vote:** 15-0-1  ·  **BCO cited:**  21-5.2 21-4.e 21-4.f 21.4.f 21-5.3 43-10 

*Source: [ga44_2016 pp. 501–513](../markdown/ga44_2016.md)*

---

**CASE 2014-01**

**TE DON AVEN AND TE DAVID DIVELY**

**VS.**

**OHIO VALLEY PRESBYTERY**

#### DECISION ON COMPLAINT

**JUNE 9, 2015**

**SUMMARY OF THE CASE**

A minister notified his Presbytery his view had changed on Larger Catechism
177, now disagreeing with the final clause regarding the admission requirement
for the Lord’s Supper (“... only to such as are of years and ability to examine
themselves.”) Presbytery adopted a recommendation from its Credentials
Committee and judged the minister’s difference as being “more than
semantic, but neither striking at the vitals of religion nor hostile to our
system of doctrine.” Two ministers filed a complaint against that judgment,
Presbytery declined to sustain it, and the two then filed a complaint with the
SJC. The full SJC heard the Complaint, declined to either sustain or deny,
and is now sending the matter back to the Presbytery, due to an insufficient
Record.

**I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS**

12/04/13 TE Charles Hickey, Pastor of Trinity Presbyterian Church of
Ludlow, KY, officially notified Ohio Valley Presbytery
(OVP) of a change in his view regarding the final clause in
the answer to Larger Catechism question 177. He included
the following as an attachment to that email notification:

Exception of TE Hickey to Westminster Larger
Catechism Answer to Question 177:

I find in the Bible that participation in the
sacramental meals on the part of the members of
the covenant community, in good spiritual
standing, was never limited by any factor other
than the ability to ingest solid food (Exodus 12:4)

and do find the assumption everywhere that
covenant children were included in the sacred

meals of the covenant community (Lev 10:14;
22:10-11; Deut. 12:6-7, 12, 18; 14:26, 16:11, 14).
I am unconvinced that the warnings found in 1
Corinthians 11 regarding unworthy participation,
similar as they are to what are found in the ancient
prophets, are in any way directed at little children.
Therefore, I take exception to the phrase contained
in Westminster Larger Catechism answer 177;
“…and that only to such as are of years and ability
to examine themselves” as being an extra-biblical
requirement for covenant participation at the
sacramental meal.

Rationale

in taking this exception i wish to make clear that i
am not denying the necessity of faith for salvation,
or, for that matter, for participation in the Lord's
Supper. I believe that, as the Westminster divines
assert in their Directory of Worship, baptized
covenant children are "Christians." Not only can I
not find in the Bible our traditional teaching that
some Christians must not participate in the
sacramental life of the church, but I find the Bible
regularly numbering covenant children among the
believers. Covenant children are in Holy Scripture
artlessly identified as those who trust in the Lord
(Psalm 22:9-10; Psalm 71:4-6; Luke 1:44), who
offer a sacrifice of praise (Psalm 8:1-2), as saints
(Eph. 1:1; 6:1-2), as heirs of the promise (Acts
2:39), as the saved (Acts 16:31), as those inhabited
by the Holy Spirit (Acts 2:38-39), and as citizens
of the kingdom of God (Luke 18:16). They are
with a similar artlessness included among the
repentant (Joel 2:12-17). Certainly if a covenant
child can rejoice in the presence of the Son of
God, or trust in the Lord while at his mother's
breast, or know the Scripture’s [ _sic_ ] from his
infancy, it cannot be said that the Bible regards
covenant children as incapable of spiritual acts.

The only other qualification necessary for
participation in the Supper that I can find in the
Bible is the ability to eat solid food and drink from
a cup (Exod. 12:4). Furthermore, if the children of
believers are recipients of the promise of the
remission of their sins and the gift of the Holy
Spirit (Acts 2:29), then surely the signs and seals
of those promises, both sacraments, should attend
the recipients of the promise.

Though John Calvin did not embrace the
communing of small children at the Lord’s Table,
I believe that Calvin's concept of covenant
children possessing "faith in the seed" is a helpful
way to describe the burden of this large body of
biblical material (Institutes, IV, xvi, 16-20). In my
view, given that both the Bible and the
Westminster divines identify covenant children as
Christians, it follows by rigorous necessity that
their Christian life, their faith, if you will, should
be nurtured by the ordinary means of grace (Acts
2:42). But if nurtured by hearing and learning the
Word of God (certainly an activity that presumes
some capacity for spiritual development (cf. 2
Tim. 3:14-15; Deut. 6:4-7), why not by the
sacrament as well, which, it is to be remembered,
has often been identified in our tradition as "a

visible word"? Our authorities have often described
the Lord's Supper as the "sacrament of nutrition,"
but if so, why would the infant faith of covenant
children not be nourished by this means? Calvin's
insistence that covenant children are to grow into a
fuller understanding of their baptism as they get
older serves as well to describe their developing
relationship to the Lord's Supper [xvi, 21].

In short, covenant children are reckoned in the
Bible as believers in God and Christ, even if their
faith is in the seed and not yet in the mature fruit,
and as believers they have a right to participate in
the Lord's Supper precisely so that their faith may
be nourished unto maturity.

01/11/14 OVP Stated Meeting. The change in view was discussed in
Executive Session, and the minutes record the following:
“When Presbytery rose from executive session, it was
reported that action on the TE’s view would be postponed
until the May Stated Meeting, and that all TEs who are
members of Ohio Valley Presbytery and all REs serving
Ohio Valley Presbytery churches, may take part in
discussion outside the meeting concerning the change in the
TE's views.”

05/20/14 OVP Stated Meeting. The Minutes recorded the minister’s
stated difference (minus rationale), followed by Presbytery’s
two actions:

A Presbytery Committee recommended his difference be
judged as “more than semantic, but neither striking at the
vitals of religion nor hostile to our system of doctrine.”
Presbytery concurred, and adopted the following:

MSA that Presbytery receive Pastor Hickey’s difference as
more than semantic, but neither striking at the vitals of
religion nor hostile to our system of doctrine.

MSA that Presbytery not allow Pastor Hickey to practice or
promote from the pulpit this difference in order to preserve
the peace and unity of the church.

07/18/14 Revs. Aven and Dively filed a Complaint with OVP against
Presbytery’s judgment on the difference (first motion above).

07/23/14 Rev. Dively, who was then the Presbytery Clerk, emailed
presbyters the Complaint three months prior to OVP’s
October Stated Meeting.

10/21/14 OVP Stated Meeting. Complaint was considered and denied.

11/07/14 Revs. Aven & Dively filed Complaint with SJC. The Case
was assigned to a Panel of three SJC members who had been
randomly selected (for the next case) before the Case was
filed.

12/8/14 OVP Clerk Dively filed initial Record of the Case (80
pages).

01/08/15 Additional documents were added to the Record at the
request of the parties and the Panel, and the Record was
finalized at 133 pages. The Panel then requested the SJC
officers to consider conducting a full SJC Hearing on the
case because of the significance of the Case and because the
panel could not likely hold a hearing and render a proposed
judgment in time for consideration at the March SJC
meeting. The Parties did not oppose this request, and the
officers assigned the case to the full SJC.

01/23/15 Complainants filed a Preliminary Brief.

02/17/15 Presbytery filed a Preliminary Brief.

03/05/15 Hearing was conducted before the full SJC at its stated meeting
in Atlanta, GA. Rev. Hickey was present as a visitor. At the
Complainants’ request, Rev. Dominic Aquila assisted them
and presented their case. Following a lengthy SJC discussion,
a committee was appointed to draft and recommend a
proposed Decision.

06/09/15 The SJC considered the Committee’s recommendation, and
after amendment, adopted this Decision.

**III. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUE**

Should the Complaint be sustained, which alleges Presbytery erred on
May 20, 2014, when it granted an exception to TE Hickey’s stated
difference as to Larger Catechism 177, with respect to limiting
participation in the Lord’s Supper to those “such as are of years and
ability to examine themselves,” as being more than semantic but neither
striking at the vitals of religion nor hostile to our system of doctrine?

**IV. JUDGMENT**

The Complaint is neither Sustained nor Denied. The Commission cannot
render judgment because the Record is insufficient regarding this
minister’s _particular expression_ of his view. Therefore, the Commission
sends the matter back to OVP to hear further from TE Hickey regarding
his stated difference in order to create a more comprehensive Record.

**V. REASONING**

Our polity related to our system of doctrine depends on the diligence and
integrity of our ministers to identify fundamental changes in their views
and to make them known to the presbytery ( _BCO_ 21-5.2). Once such a
disclosure is made, our _BCO_ does not provide express procedural
guidance in dealing with the matter. However, by analogy the court
should be guided by _BCO_ 21.4.e and 21.4.f.

When reviewing whether a man’s stated difference is “out of accord with
any fundamental of our system of doctrine” (i.e., because it is “hostile to
the system [or] strikes at the vitals of religion”), the court will ordinarily
need to consider more than the man’s mere citation of the confessional

section, and in many cases, even more than a summary statement of the
difference. The court will often need also to consider the Biblical and

Confessional exegesis, and the theological reasoning that is used to
support the difference. It is that underlying exegesis and reasoning that
will evidence how the man and the court is understanding the
Constitution of the Church and thus should be an important part of the
higher court’s review of the lower court’s decision. This could be
warranted even with commonly expressed confessional differences, at
least in part because there could be instances where two men disagree
with the same confessional statement, but for different reasons. And
while one man’s reasons might be acceptable to the Presbytery, the other
man’s might not be. Consider two examples.

First, consider two men who take exception to the language of Larger
Catechism 191 that states that the church is to be “countenanced and
maintained by the civil magistrate” arguing that this statement goes
beyond the God-given authority of the civil magistrate. One man,
however, might defend his difference by reasoning that Scripture (e.g.,
Mt. 22:21) and the Confession (e.g., 23:3) point to a greater separation of
civil and ecclesiastical authority than is apparently recognized by his
reading of LC 191. The other might support his difference by arguing
that because all authority on heaven and earth has now been given to
Christ (Mt. 28:18) and because Christ has delegated his earthly authority
to the church (Mt. 16:17-19), therefore the civil magistrate has no
authority over the church (or individual Christians, for that matter), and
indeed, by virtue of Mt. 16, the church should have authority over the
civil magistrate. Whatever is right or wrong with either of these views,
surely the second raises more serious questions about the nature of the

difference, not because of the mere statement of the difference, but
because of the issues raised in the supporting argumentation.

Similarly, consider two men who take exception to the phrase “without
body, parts, or passions” in WCF 2:1. One man states he objects to the
phrase because he believes saying God does not have “passions” means
God cannot love. A second man states he objects to the phrase because
he believes God has “passions” that are contingent upon the actions of
men. Again, whatever one thinks of these reasons, the second raises
more serious questions than the first because of the underlying reasoning.

In the same manner, in this case the question before OVP and this
Commission is not simply whether or not paedocommunion is an
allowable exception, but whether this particular formulation of that
confessional difference, as developed int e Hickey’s reasoning, is
allowable, or whether it “strikes at the vitals of religion” or is “hostile to
the system of doctrine.” Given that, it is not sufficient to conclude that
because “paedocommunion” has been deemed an allowable exception in
other settings, TE Hickey’s expression of it must be so deemed here. The
question that must be addressed is whether this particular formulation of
that difference justifies the granting of an exception.

Apart from his statement of difference, certain statements in TE Hickey’s
rationale require further explanation for the Record. It is not clear from
the Record how Presbytery understood these statements, or whether
Presbytery required or received such further explanation. Further, before
the SJC renders a judgment, TE Hickey should have an opportunity to
provide a fuller statement of his view than what is contained in the
Record, should he desire tod o so.

The Record was insufficient in the following respects:

1. The Record does not indicate: a) whether the following statements in
the minister’s “rationale” mean he believes all covenant children

have some degree of faith, or b) what he believes is the nature of
“infant faith” with respect to the child’s capacity for spiritual
discernment.

[ _Opening to Rationale_ ] In taking this exception I wish to
make clear that I am not denying the necessity of faith for
salvation, or, for that matter, for participation in the

Lord's Supper. I believe that, as the Westminster divines
assert in their Directory of Worship, baptized covenant
children are "Christians."

. . .Though John Calvin did not embrace the communing
of small children at the Lord’s Table, I believe that
Calvin's concept of covenant children possessing "faith in
the seed" is a helpful way to describe the burden of this
large body of biblical material (Institutes, IV, xvi, 16-20).

[ _Conclusion to Rationale_ ] In short, covenant children are
reckoned in the Bible as believers in God and Christ,
even if their faith is in the seed and not yet in the mature
fruit, and as believers they have a right to participate in
the Lord's Supper precisely so that their faith may be
nourished unto maturity.

2. The Record does not indicate whether Presbytery judged this
minister’s confessional difference to only pertain to LC 177, or
whether it logically results in a difference with other sections. For
example, in this instance should the stated difference also require
expressing differences to six other questions of the Larger Catechism,
with respect to:

− those who “worthily communicate” (LC 170, as well as _WCF_
29:7),

−
the requirements of preparation (171),

−
the appropriate resolution of doubts or lack of preparation
(172),

−
concerning the “ignorant” professors (173),

−
concerning the duties of participants at the time of
administration (174),

−
and the duties of participants after they have received the
sacrament (175)?

3. If the stated difference does result in differences with other sections,
what are the implications of that for the nature of the exception?
Given that _Confession of Faith_ 28:6 makes specific provision for the
efficacy of baptism to be delayed in time from its administration, and
that there is no like provision for the efficacy of the Lord’s Supper,
does not the stated difference also require an expression of
corresponding differences to questions 171-175 of the Larger
Catechism?

4. The Record does not make clear whether the minister reached his

position solely on his view that “covenant children were included in
the sacred meals of the covenant community” simply on the basis of
their being covenant children and his exegesis of 1 Corinthians
11:27-29, or whether there are additional theological reasons for his
particular difference ( _e.g.,_ the child’s personal discerning faith, as
distinguished from the representational faith of the child’s parents).

5. If the minister’s reasons are based upon the exegesis of 1 Corinthians
11:27-29, then the Record does not indicate how the minister
exegetes that passage or related Standards (possible examples being
LC 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, and 177 (where it is the only text
cited)). Further, how, for example, would the minister’s exegesis fit
with “remembrance passages” like Luke 22:19 and 1 Corinthians
11:24-25?

6. The Record does not indicate how the stated difference affects the

minister’s approval of the PCA’s form of government and discipline
as being in conformity with the general rules of biblical polity ( _BCO_
21-5.3), given the _BCO_ ’s frequently expressed distinction between
communicant and non-communicant members. Further, with the
stated difference, the Record does not indicate how the minister will
comply with and enforce the above-mentioned distinctions of the
_BCO_ .

We conclude that the Record before us is insufficient to allow us to reach

a determination on this case. Accordingly, we remand this case to the
Presbytery to hear further from TE Hickey regarding his change in view.
Such a remand has been an option ( _BCO_ 43-10) for higher courts for
over a century. For example, in his comments on the same provision in
the 1898 Book of Church Order, F. P. Ramsay observed that the higher
court “may wait for fuller records before deciding the issue.” [ 1]

Finally, if this matter comes back to the SJC, the Record shall include the
133-page Record from Case 2014-01, and any additional material
considered by Presbytery when it hears the matter, including any
supplemental or clarifying material submitted by TE Hickey.

1 _Exposition of the Book of Church Order_, 1898, pp. 255-256, on Chapter XIII, Sec. 4, para. 4. Ramsay,
an expert in ecclesiastical law, was President of Fredericksburg College **,** Virginia in 1898.
[http://pcahistory.org/bco/rod/43/10.html & https://archive.org/details/expositionofform00rams](http://pcahistory.org/bco/rod/43/10.html)

A committee of five SJC members initially drafted this Decision. After
amendment, it was adopted by the SJC on June 9, 2015 by a vote of 15-0-1.
Vote on Decision in Case 2014-01. ( [R] denotes Ruling Elder.)

Barker, _Absent_ Duncan [R], _Concur_ Neikirk [R, ] _Concur_
Bise [R], _Concur_ Greco, _Concur_ Nusbaum [R, ] _Concur_
Burnett [R], _Absent_ Gunn, _Concur_ Pickering [R, ] _Concur_
Cannata, _Absent_ Haigler [R, ] _Absent_ Robertson, _NotQual*_
Carrell [R, ] _Concur_ Kooistra, _Absent_ Terrell [R, ] _Absent_
Chapell, _Concur_ Lyle, _Absent_ White [R, ] _Concur_
Coffin, _Concur_ McGowan, _Concur_ Wilson [R, ] _Concur_
Donahoe [R], _Concur_ Meyerhoff, _Concur_

#### CONCURRING OPINION

**JUDICIAL CASE 2014-01**

**TE DON AVEN AND TE DAVID DIVELY**

**VS.**

**OHIO VALLEY PRESBYTERY**

**JULY 22, 2015**

#### Concurring Opinion of RE Howard Donahoe

As I understand it, the Complainants alleged two Presbytery errors. First,
they alleged Presbytery erred by allowing _anyone_ to disagree with the final
clause of Larger Catechism 177. Here’s the assertion from their Brief:

The specific phrase that is the object of the difference: _“. . ._
_and that only to such as are of years and ability to examine_
_themselves”_ is such a significant part of the fundamentals of
the system of doctrine that to grant an exception to it tears at
the very fabric of the system so as to disfigure and distort the
whole system. [2]

Second, they alleged Presbytery erred by granting the exception in this
particular instance given the minister’s “specific statements” and his
“expanded reasoning.” [3]

2 Complainant’s Preliminary Brief, page 5 lines 37-40
3 Complainant’s Preliminary Brief, page 2 line 17 and page 5 line 14.

I concurred with the SJC that the Record was insufficient as it pertained to
the second part regarding the minister’s _particular expression_ of his view. [4]
My concern was not Presbytery’s judgment granting the exception for the
difference per se, but whether Presbytery exercised appropriate or sufficient
judgment on some things in the minister’s rationale, o rat le aston how he
expressed them (i.e., his _particular expression_ ). And a fuller Record could
address that.

There’s a distinction between a man’s confessional “difference” (i.e., the
specific part of the Standards with which he disagrees or has reservations _BCO_ 21.4.f.) [ 5] and the rationale he might provide to support or explain his
view (“in their own words” - _RAO_ 16.3.e.5). As the SJC shows with its
illustrations on LC 191 and _WCF_ 2:1, a pres byte ry might judge a difference
to be permissible in and of itself, but might have different concerns arising
from a man’s rationale for holding the difference.

On the other hand, there are certain parts of the Standards on which
disagreements have already been judged, or probably would be judged, as
unacceptable _regardless_ of a man’s rationale. Below are some examples.

− cessation of certain kinds of revelation ( _WCF_ 1:1, 6) [6]
− divine inspiration of Scripture ( _WCF_ 1:8)
− particular redemption ( _WCF_ 3:4-7) [7]
− infant baptism ( _WCF_ 28:4) [8]
− existence of hell ( _WCF_ 32:1)
− marriage only between ama nan da woman ( _WCF_ 24:1)

The examining court, and the appellate Church courts, would likely judge
any disagreement with one of those fundamental doctrines as disqualifying,
regardless of a man’s particular expression of his view.

Unlike the six examples above, a disagreement with the final clause of LC
177 should not automatically be judged as disqualifying - and no ga o rs jc

4 Italics are original in the SJC Judgment.
5 For use of the noun “difference” in the Record of the Case, see p. 2 fifth paragraph; p. 59 item 13h; p.
62 second paragraph, and p. 68 item 2.
6 _Landrum v. MS Valley_, Case 95-11, _M26GA_ [pp. 222-227, http://pcahistory.org/ga/26th_pcaga_1998.pdf](http://pcahistory.org/ga/26th_pcaga_1998.pdf)
_Bogue v. Ascension, M8GA_ [pp. 50, 63, 92, http://pcahistory.org/ga/8th_pcaga_1980.pdf](http://pcahistory.org/ga/8th_pcaga_1980.pdf)
_Gentry v. Calvary_, Case 86-01, _M14GA_ [p. 229, http://pcahistory.org/ga/14th_pcaga_1986.pdf](http://pcahistory.org/ga/14th_pcaga_1986.pdf)
_Serio v. Palmetto_, Case 88-10, _M16GA_ pp. 191-198, http://pcahistory.org/ga/16th_pcaga_1988.pdf
7 _Bowen v. E. Carolina_, Case 1990-8, _M19GA_, pp. 537-564, http://pcahistory.org/ga/19th_pcaga_1991.pdf
8 Ibid.

has ever judged it to be so. [9] I concurred with the SJC’s Judgment in this
Case largely because the SJC did _not_ judge it to be so. If the SJC had agreed
with the Complainant’s key assertion in the excerpt from their Brief above, it
could have sustained the Complaint rather than remanding for a more
comprehensive Record.

/s/ RE Howard Donahoe

#### CONCURRING OPINION

**JUDICIAL CASE 2014-01**

**TE DON AVEN AND TE DAVID DIVELY**

**VS.**

**OHIO VALLEY PRESBYTERY**

**JULY 22, 2015**

#### Concurring Opinion of TE Grover Gunn, joined by RE John Bise

The change in views at the center of this case involves paedocommunion, a
term that can cover a broad range of possible opinions on the admitting of
baptized covenant children to the Lord's Supper. The term could possibly
refer merely to a rejection of adult only communion and an openness to the
possibility that a baptized covenant child may, at an age younger than usual
or traditional, have a profession of faith that provides credible evidence that
he has the maturity of faith needed for partaking of the Lord's Supper
meaningfully and responsibly. I do not regard this degree of
paedocommunion as an exception to our Standards, provided that one is not
significantly and artificially lowering our Standards' measures of readiness to
partake. At the opposite extreme of possible meanings is the view that every
covenant infant should partake of the Lord's Supper as soon as possible after
his baptism through someone's inserting into his mouth at a communion
service a small crumb of communion breadth at has absorbed a small drop of
communion wine. This view totally eliminates the distinction between

9 Most recently, by a 69-31% margin, the June 2015 chattanooga ga adopted a recommendation from a
minority of the Committee on Review of Presbytery Records and _declined_ to cite Susquehanna Valley
Presbytery for its judgment allowing such a difference with LC 177. The RPR Committee had, by a
vote of 29-22, recommended the GA cite Presbytery simply for granting the exception, without RPR
noting any specific concern about the man’s rationale or particular expression of his view. But instead,
the RPR Minority’s recommendation _against_ any citing was adopted. See also the June 2013 action of
the Greenville GA judging Pacific NW Presbytery’s response “Satisfactory.” _M41GA_, pp. 464-465 for
[GA’s action and pp. 500-514 for PNW’s Response. http://pcahistory.org/ga/41st_pcaga_2013.pdf](http://pcahistory.org/ga/41st_pcaga_2013.pdf)

communing and non-communing baptized members in the visible church. I
regard this degree of paedocommunion as an exception to our Standards that
is out of accord with the fundamentals of our system of doctrine. Because the
term “paedocommunion” has such a wide range of possible meanings, I
agree with the opinion in the SJC decision that a presbytery should examine
in thorough detail on a case by case basis the new views of any TE who
reports a change in views that involves paedocommunion. I also agree that
the presbytery should also record in its minutes a detailed explanation of its
evaluation of such changed views.

I commend the TE at the center of this case for his honesty in reporting to his
Presbytery with transparent candor the changes in his views since he took his
ordination vows. He has specified where his new view fits within the broad
spectrum described above. He believes that all covenant children are
believers who should be admitted to the Lord's Table as soon after baptism as
they can ingest solid food. This view limits baptized, non-communing
members in the visible church to baptized covenant children who are not yet
able to ingest solid food. I believe that he has expressed his new view in the
current record of the case with sufficient clarity and detail to allow the SJC to
render an informed judgment on the compatibility of his new view with our
Standards. In my opinion, his new view as expressed in the current record is
out of accord with the fundamentals of our system of doctrine. Nevertheless I
am willing to concur with the decision of the majority of the SJC to remand
the case back to the Presbytery without denying or sustaining the complaint.
The degree of paedocommunion in this case is far enough along the spectrum
to have serious theological implications that contradict fundamentals of our
system of doctrine beyond the explicit contradiction which I profess to see as
noted above. This possibility is largely not addressed in the current record of
this case. As suggested in the decision, there are questions that still need to
be asked and areas that still need to be investigated. My hope is that
remanding this case back to the Presbytery will give the Presbytery an
opportunity to supplement the current record so that it becomes more
complete and provides greater clarity. I would, of course, re-evaluate my
judgment in response to any substantial clarifications and modifications in a
new record.

/s/ TE Grover Gunn, joined by RE John Bise

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
