# Case 2016-13 — RE Scott Daniels, et al. Nashville Presbytery

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 46th (2018)  ·  **Disposition:** dismissed  ·  **Vote:** 13-6  ·  **Dissent:** yes  ·  **BCO cited:**  43-1 43-2 43-7 BCO 43-1 BCO 43-2 

*Source: [ga46_2018 pp. 525–528](../markdown/ga46_2018.md)*

---

minister regards as fairly representing his view. This should certainly
involve phone conversations, and perhaps even a dinner conversation or two
(or at least attempts at such). And it might be prudent to recruit a mediator,
o rat least a conversation-facilitator. This would be good stewardship of the
Lord’s time, because the alternative could consume hundreds of man-hours.
The Record of this Case did not indicate this course was followed, and I’m
not convinced this process can reasonably be fulfilled via e-mail. [ 14] For the
several reasons outlined above, I concurred with the Judgment to deny this
Complaint.

/s/ RE Howard Donahoe, et al

**CASE 2016-13**

_**RE SCOTT DANIELS, et al.**_

_**VS.**_

_**NASHVILLE PRESBYTERY**_

#### DECISION ON COMPLAINT

**August 30, 2017**

The Standing Judicial Commission finds that circumstances have rendered
the Complaint moot.

The foregoing decision was approved on the following roll call vote

Bankson, _Concur_
Bise, _Dissent_
Cannata, _Concur_
Carrell, _Dissent_
Chapell, _Concur_
Coffin, _Concur_
Donahoe, _Concur_
Dowling, _Dissentr_

Duncan, _Concur_
Evans, _Concur_
Fowler, _Dissent_
Greco, _Absent_
Jones, _Concur_
Kooistra, _Absent_
McGowan, _Disqual._
Meyerhoff, _Concur_

Neikirk, _Dissent_
Nusbaum, _Concur_
Pickering, _Concur_
Terrell, _Concur_
Waters, _Dissent_
White, _Concur_
Wilson, _Concur_

TE McGowan disqualified himself as he is a member of the Presbytery,
which is a party to the case. _OMSJC_ 2.10(d)(3)(iii).

14 The Evangelical Presbyterian Church’s _BCO_ has a lengthy section suggesting such
mediation and providing helpful steps. (Book of Discipline 3-2: “Mediation”)
http://epcoga.wpengine.com/wp-content/uploads/Files/4-Resources/5-Downloadable-EPCResources/A-Constitution-Doctrine/BookOfOrder2016-17.pdf

#### DISSENTING OPINION

**ON CASE 2016-13**

RE Frederick Neikirk, joined by RE John Bise, RE Dan Carrell, RE Steve
Dowling, TE Paul Fowler, and TE Guy Waters.

The undersigned respectfully dissent from the decision of the Standing
Judicial Commission to declare moot case 2016-13 (Daniels, et al vs.
Nashville Presbytery). We issue this dissent not only to clear our
consciences but because we are concerned that this decision may open the
door for the Standing Judicial Commission to proceed in other cases in ways
that may undermine the credibility of the Commission and its decisions.

this case involved a disagreement overt he proper power sofa Session, and a
ruling by Nashville Presbytery that the Session in question had erred and had
to redress its actions. Some members of the Session and Congregation
disagreed with the decision of Presbytery and complained against
Presbytery’s decision. As such, there is a legitimate dispute. Further, the
issue and actions have been raised and communicated in ways that the
Record shows have made the dispute(s) known within the Congregation, the
Presbytery, and other area churches. Given this, the parties deserve to have
the Complaint answered, either to vindicate the position of Presbytery or to
correct Presbytery if its conclusions were erroneous. That right should be
denied only if the Complainants abandon their complaint, the requirements of
_BCO_ 43-1, 2 (cf., _OMSJC_ 9.1, 10.3) are not met, or the matter was clearly
decided in another, related, case.

In this case there is no evidence that the parties abandoned their Complaint.
They did not, sofa ra swear e aware, send a letter saying they wished to
withdraw their Complaint and they did not fail to appear at a hearing ( _BCO_
43-7). We grant that there is a question in the Record as to whether the
Complainants complied with the filing guidelines of _BCO_ 43-2 (cf., _OMSJC_
9.1, 10.3). Given, however, the lack of documentation in the Record regarding
this question, any decision as to whether the Complaint was timely filed
should have been handled by appointing a Panel, allowing the Panel to work
with the parties to perfect the Record, and then letting the Panel rule on
whether the case is judicially in order. That is the procedure the Commission
has followed in other cases where there was a dispute between the parties as
to whether the record demonstrated that a complaint had been properly filed.

Instead of dealing properly with this case through one of the mechanisms
noted above, the Standing Judicial Commission dealt with it by declaring the

matter to be moot. What is perplexing is that the Commission provides no
evidence or rationale for this conclusion. Thus, we are left to speculate,
based on the discussion in the Commission meeting, as to the reason(s) that
led to the decision. One possibility is that the Commission concluded this
case was moot because it was clearly related to already decided cases arising
out of Nashville Presbytery. But, while Case 2016-13 is certainly related to
those other cases, it raises an issue that was not before the Commission in
any of those other cases. As such, Case 2016-13 cannot be declared moot on
the grounds that the issue has already been decided.

A second possibility is that the Commission concluded the case has become
moot because all the Complainants have left the church in question, and
maybe the PCA. This possibility, however, raises a factual question that
should be settled only by evidence presented in the Record of the Case and
thus is known to all members of the Commission. There is nothing in the
Record that indicates that those who filed the Complaint have left the church
in question or the PCA. Thus, if this is the reason the Commission declared
the case to be moot, it would clearly violate the fourth vow taken by SJC
members (“I will judge according to the Constitution of the Presbyterian
Church in America, through my best efforts **applied to nothing other than**
**the record of the case and other documents properly before me** ” (see
_RAO_ 17-1, emphasis added). Moreover, even if evidence were to reveal a
departure of some of the Complainants from the church and the PCA the
Complaint would remain in order because those remaining would still have
standing, and if all the Complainants left the church and the PCA, a better
characterization would be that the Complaint had been abandoned, not that it
had become moot.

A final possibility is that the Standing Judicial Commission voted to declare
the case moot because it did not want to take it up. Unlike the procedures of
the U.S. Supreme Court, however, there is no procedure in the Constitution
of the PCA to allow the Standing Judicial Commission to pick and choose
which cases it wants to take up. If, as some have proposed, the PCA wanted
to give the Standing Judicial Commission the power to refuse to hear cases
that it did not want to take up, that would be a different matter. But that is
not where we are. The fourth vow taken by SJC members obligates us to
“ **judge according to the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in**
**America** ” ( _RAO_ 17-1, emphasis added). That means the Commission must
take up whatever cases are properly before it.

In sum, the Commission provides no rationale for its determination that Case
2016-13 is moot, and any rationale we can infer based on the discussions

within the Commission appears to be unconstitutional. In our view, that
means the Commission has made a serious error in its handling of this case.
Even more troubling is the precedent this decision appears to set. If the SJC
can declare a case to be moot without providing reasoning and evidence from
the record of the case, then the door is opened to future Standing Judicial
Commissions using declarations of mootness to make decisions that rest on
reasoning that is not available to the Church at large or on facts that are not
available in the record (and thus are not available to all members of the
Commission). This would seriously undermine the rules and safeguards set
forth in the vows in _RAO_ 17-1 and would, thereby, do serious damage to the
credibility of the Commission and its decisions. It is out of these concerns
that we are compelled to register this dissent.

**CASE 2016-15**

_**APPEAL OF TE JAMES BACHMANN**_

_**VS.**_

_**NASHVILLE PRESBYTERY**_

#### DECISION ON APPEAL

**June 13, 2017**

**I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS**

10/11/15 As a result of tensions and conflicts within the ministerial

staff and Session of Covenant Presbyterian Church (CPC) of
Nashville since at least the spring of 2014, Senior Pastor TE
James Bachmann communicated to the Session’s Personnel
Committee that after much prayer and consultation with his
family he had decided to make a “formal request to retire
from the ministry of Covenant Presbyterian Church,
contingent on a suitable financial arrangement.”

10/19/15 At a Session meeting it was moved that the Session accept
Pastor Bachmann’s request for retirement under the
conditions he formally requested.

10/21/15 TE Bachmann sent via email a letter to the Members of CPC
announcing his possible retirement as Senior Pastor: “…
during the last 18 months I have wondered if some elders
desire a change in leadership. Therefore, my contingent offer

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
