# Case p140 — Case 2007-7: case is the appointment of the Pulpit (Stated Supply Approval) Commission. As set forth above, KEP did not err in the appointment of this commission, as well as the scope of the matters that were entr

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 37th (2009)  ·  **Disposition:** dismissed  ·  **Vote:** 21C-2A-2R  ·  **BCO cited:**  25-9 25-11 3-4 11-1 11-2 11-4 31-2 13-9 14-7 

*Source: [ga37_2009 pp. 140–144](../markdown/ga37_2009.md)*

---

from the civil courts to resolve purely civil matters, such as trespass
or breach of contract.

It should be noted that the primary issue raised in Case 2007-7 case is
the appointment of the Pulpit (Stated Supply Approval) Commission.
As set forth above, KEP did not err in the appointment of this
commission, as well as the scope of the matters that were entrusted to
it when it was formed, i.e. receiving requests from the Session of
HKPC to establish temporary relationships and approve stated supply
pastors. Actions by KEP to allow its Pulpit (Stated Supply)
Commission to function as the Session of HKPC and the subsequent
filing of a lawsuit in civil court were errors on the part of KEP.

It is noted that the KEP Executive Committee decided to file the
lawsuit in civil court during an informal “call around” and no minutes
of the action exist. _Robert’s Rules of Order_ specifically addresses
this situation and provides that “…such a meeting must be conducted
by a technology that allows all persons participating to hear each
other at the same time…” The action of the KEP Executive Committee,
therefore, was in conflict with _Robert’s Rules of Order_ .

as a result of the lawsuit, the parties were involved in protracted civil
litigation in the New Jersey Superior Court, which was relying, in
part, on this ecclesiastical court for guidance in applying the PCA’s
polity to the civil matters that were before it.

Prior to seeking this guidance, the New Jersey Court found that the
polity or government of the PCA was that of a hierarchal denomination.
There is however a significant difference between the PCA’s
Presbyterian polity and the polity of hierarchal denominations.

Basically, from a civil standpoint, a denomination is classified as
hierarchal or non-hierarchal based on the extent its constitutional
documents give a higher court (general assembly, synod, or presbytery)
the power to control the lower courts (presbyteries and local
churches). The more control a denomination has over lower courts,
the more likely the denomination is to be deemed to be hierarchal.

a determination that a denomination is hie r arch al h ascertain legal
consequences; the primary one being that a hierarchal denomination,
such as a Roman Catholic Diocese, is more likely to be held liable for
civil wrongs that take place in the local church. This is basically the
legal doctrine of _respondeate superior_, i.e. an employer is liable for

the actions of its employee. Another legal consequence is that civil
courts will afford more deference to decisions of a higher court
(presbytery or general assembly) in civil disputes with a lower court,
i.e. civil courts are more reluctant to overturn decisions of a higher
court in a hierarchal denomination.

Otherwise stated, a non-hierarchal denomination is generally immune
from civil liability for wrongs that develop in the lower courts.

The non-hierarchical, voluntary nature of the PCA is explicitly stated
in _BCO_ 25-9 and 25-10 regarding church property and in _BCO_ 25-11
regarding the process for withdrawing from the denomination. The
authority/power of the Church, according to the PCA _Book of Church_
_Order_ therefore, is only moral and spiritual, ministerial and declarative.

This is evidenced by the following provisions of the _BCO_, to wit: 1)
“the power of the Church is exclusively spiritual, _BCO_ 3-4, 2) church
courts “have no jurisdiction in political or civil affairs,” _BCO_ 11-1, 3)
church courts “have no power to inflict temporal pains and penalties,
but their authority is in all respects moral or spiritual,” _BCO_ 11-1, 3)
the jurisdiction of church courts is “only ministerial and declarative,”
_BCO_ 11-2, and 4) the jurisdiction of the church courts is “limited by
the express provisions of the Constitution,” _BCO_ 11-4.

Church members, Teaching Elders, Ruling Elders, and Deacons take
vows to voluntarily place themselves under the spiritual authority of
the Church. Officers pledge to exercise the duties of their office in
accord with the Constitution of the PCA. These vows have a moral
responsibility (though not a legal obligation) to abide by the decision,
judgment, or order of the church court. However, they may file a
complaint or appeal the action to a higher court. Once the matter has
been finally handled by the higher court, there is, because of the vows
taken, a moral responsibility (though not a legal obligation) to abide
by the final disposition of the matter as long as they are members of
the PCA.

If one cannot do so, he may leave the PCA without coercion. If a
person does not accept this moral responsibility, he may face charges
in accord with _BCO_ 31-2 and if found guilty, ecclesiastical censures
in accord with _BCO_ 36. If a church does not accept this moral
responsibility to abide by a final decision/action of a presbytery, then
presbytery’s response is to either “dissolve” [the ecclesiastical

relationship between] the church and the PCA or “dismiss” [transfer]
the church [to another denomination] with the church’s consent. See
_BCO_ 13-9(f). Filing a complaint in civil court to enforce this moral
responsibility is not within the authority and power of a presbytery.

The PCA is connectional, but non-hierarchal, in that the power of the
church is not civil or coercive, but moral and spiritual, ministerial and
declarative. It is constitutional, not authoritarian, that is, all of her
members, offices, and church courts are to operate within the
framework of the Constitution of the Church and may not resort to
any authority that is contrary to the Constitution. [*]

The Facts, Issues, Judgments, and Reasoning and Opinion were written by
RE Samuel J. Duncan and concurred by RE John White.

The vote on SJC 2007-9 and 2007-10 was:
TE Dominic A. Aquila, Concur TE William R. Lyle, Concur
TE Howell A. Burkhalter, Concur TE John M. McArthur, Jr., Concur
RE E. C. Burnett, Concur RE J. Grant McCabe, Concur
TE David F. Coffin Jr., Concur TE Charles E. McGowan, Concur
RE Marvin C. Culbertson, Concur TE D. Steven Meyerhoff, Concur
RE J. Howard Donahoe, Concur RE Frederick Neikirk, Concur
RE Samuel J. Duncan, Concur RE Steven T. O’Ban, Concur
TE Paul B. Fowler, Absent RE Calvin Poole, Concur
TE Grover E. Gunn III, Concur TE G. Dewey Roberts, Disqualified
TE William W. Harrell Jr., Concur RE Olin L. Stubbs, Concur
RE Terry L. Jones, Concur RE John B. White, Jr., Concur
RE Thomas F. Leopard, Absent

20 Concur, 1 Disqualified, 2 absent

#### CONCURRING OPINION

**COMPLAINTS OF TE ELIOT LEE**

**VS.**

**KOREAN EASTERN PRESBYTERY**

**SJC 2007-09 & 2007-10**

I concur in the result reached by the majority and believe that the following
reasoning further clarifies the decision.

- For a more complete discussion of the non-hierarchical nature of the PCA see _The_
_Presbyterian Church in America: Non-Hierarchical Presbyterianism_ by L. Roy
Taylor (available from the PCA Stated Clerk’s Office.

A. Case 2007-9, Complaint of TE Eliot Lee vs. Korean Eastern Presbytery.

The 1982 General Assembly adopted part of a report from the Ad Interim
Committee on the General Assembly, which requested the following
points be recognized:

a) a higher court may not “act for” a lower court,
b) a higher court may “act on” an issue or case properly before it relating
to a lower court,
c) in the event a lower court does nothing, by virtue of its ecclesiastical
authority, the higher court may
i) ignore the failure to act,
ii) counsel, advise, exhort, and urge the lower court to comply,
iii) reprimand or rebuke the lower court,
iv) suspend one or all of the ecclesiastical privileges of the lower
court with reference to the higher courts, or
v) as a last resort “act against the lower court by dismissing it from
fellowship,” i.e. dissolving the ecclesiastical relationship between
the lower court and the higher court.

These principles have been cited by the Standing Judicial Commission in
cases adjudicated in 2002 and 2003; however, neither the report of the Ad
Interim Committee, nor the judicial cases, are binding on non-parties or
have the force of law, as _BCO_ 14-7 makes it clear that the same are only
to be “given due and serious consideration by the Church and its lower
courts when deliberating matters related to such action.” _BCO_ 14-7
further states that judicial decisions are binding and conclusive on the
parties who are directly involved, but may only be “appealed to in
subsequent similar cases as to any principle which may have been decided.”
In other words, a case decided by the Standing Judicial Commission is not
afforded the status of _stare decisis_, a concept in civil courts that prior
judicial decisions have the force of law, as if enacted by the body’s
legislature.

In 2005, the General Assembly again cited these principles and further
stated that “the higher court may not proceed in such a way that would
constitute a civil action on behalf o fa congregation without a formal vote
of the congregation. in order to be effective, any such civil action must
be with the consent or approval of the congregation, which consent or

approval is given in accordance with the civil law under which the
congregation is organized.”

B. Case 2007-10, Complaint of TE Eliot Lee vs. Korean Eastern Presbytery.
As we see it, over the years the larger Presbyterian denomination
(Presbyterian Church, USA - PCUSA) underwent a metamorphosis from
a democratic type of Presbyterianism into an hierarchal Presbyterianism,
which emphasizes the higher courts directing the affairs of the lower
courts. The PCUSA _Book of Church Order_ deals much more extensively
with detailed procedures covering a wide variety of situations and is much
longer that the PCA’s _BCO_ . In recent civil cases involving disputes over
who owns the local church property, the PCUSA argues that it is an
hierarchal denomination, with the presbytery being tantamount to a bishop.

By contrast, the PCA is a non-hierarchal, grass-roots type of
Presbyterianism. One of the major reasons for the formation of the PCA
was to revert to a democratic Presbyterianism. The PCA _BCO_ is written
more a sase t of principles, emphasizing the use of discretion and wisdom
by the lower courts. The Preface of the _BCO_ lists the Preliminary
Principles, which are an integral part of the constitution, i.e. lenses
through which the rest of the _BCO_ is to be viewed. It was not envisioned
that the PCA _BCO_ would have detailed instructions on virtually every
situation. When faced with situations and circumstances that are not dealt
with in detail in the PCA _BCO_, sessions and presbyteries should exercise
their own wisdom and discretion within the parameters of biblical
principles and the Constitution of the PCA.

Dr. Morton H. Smith, in his _Commentary on the Book of Church Order_
reiterates that the PCA is a connectional church, but that this is not a
hierarchal connection.

In their volume, _The Historical Polity of the PCA_, Robert Cannada and
W. Jack Williamson, both founding members of the PCA, note, that in the
PCA there are three separate levels of legal or civil entities:

1) the local congregation,
2) the Presbytery, and
3) the General Assembly and each entity is free standing but with a clear
and vital spiritual connection.

They state, “The PCA is a denomination made up of local congregations,
presbyteries and a General Assembly, and with no civil connection between

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
