# 2 — RE Val H. Barleman et al. v. Presbytery of Ascension

**Court:** Committee on Judicial Business (CJB)  ·  **Assembly:** 11th (1983)  ·  **Disposition:** sustained  ·  **Dissent:** yes

*Source: [ga11_1983 pp. 141–145](../markdown/ga11_1983.md#ga11-p141)*

---

# CASE 2

## Complaint of Val H. Barleman, et al. against the Presbytery of Ascension

Case 2 was presented by TE Timothy D. Rott, who began his report with prayer.

## Case 2 Complaint of Val B. Barleman et al. against the Presbytery of Ascension

Whereas, in the action of the Presbytery of Ascension of the Presbyterian Church in America, at the Stated Meeting September 11, 1982, in Monroeville, Pennsylvania, respecting the sustaining of the trials for ordination of Mr. Kurt Lutjens, which action is contrary to The Book of Church Order, Section 21-5, which requires receiving and adopting the 'Confession of Faith and the Catechism of this Church' and approving 'the form of government and discipline of the Presbyterian Church in America,' the undersigned hereby complain to the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America of this action of the Presbytery of the Ascension.

## History

In two separate papers provided to presbyters, one mailed in advance of the meeting and one distributed at the meeting, and in oral testimony before the presbytery and officially tape recorded, Mr. Lutjens made various exceptions to the Confession of Faith and the Book of Church Order, which taken singly or collectively make it impossible for him to satisfactorily affirm questions 2 and 3 of the ordination vows. An amendment to not sustain the sacraments and polity portion of the exam failed by a narrow margin. The exam as a whole was sustained with a sizeable minority voting in the negative.

## Reasons for the Complaint

(1) The candidate took exception to BCO 58-4 'which restricts the invitation given at the Lord's Supper to session-approved persons or professing Christians who are "communicants in good standing in any evangelical church." He believes it is illegitimate to include church membership as a requirement for one to participate in the Lord's Supper. In addition to explicit rejection of this portion of BCO 58-4 there are these further considerations:

(a) BC 6-2, defining communing members and their relation to the Lord's Supper as involving profession, baptism, and then admission to the Lord's Table.

(b) WCF 25:3 which states that the ordinances of God are given to the visible church.

(c) WCF 27:1 which teaches that the sacraments put 'a visible difference between . . . the Church and the rest of the world.'

(d) WLC Q. 162 which places the sacraments 'in his church,' 'to oblige them to obedience,' and 'to distinguish them from those that are without.'

(e) WCF 29:1 and WLC Q. 168 which specify participants as 'members of the same mystical body.'

(f) Given the high view of the visible church, 'out of which there is no ordinary possibility of salvation' (WCF 25:2), the flagrant disobedience to Jesus Christ in not affiliating with His Church can hardly be looked upon as 'worthy receiving' of the body and blood of Christ.

(g) Such a view with our standards concerning the relation of the sacraments to the visible church is systemic and fundamental, and it is not a valid or acceptable exception.

(2) Under examination the candidate refused to affirm that he would deny baptism to an allegedly professing adult who would not become a member of the visible church upon baptism. The constitutionality of this is denied.

(a) WCF 27:1 declares that 'sacraments are . . . to put a visible difference between those that belong unto the Church, and the rest of the world.'

(b) WCF 28:1 declares that 'baptism is . . . for the solemn admission of the party baptized into the visible Church.'

The Scriptural support for this makes such a recipient disobedient to Jesus Christ and thus brings the credibility of his profession into question.

(c) WLC Q. 165 brings together regeneration and union with Christ and being admitted into the visible church.

(d) WLC Q. 166 prohibits baptisms to those 'that are out of the visible church,' and it does this on the grounds that those outside the visible church are also 'strangers from the covenant of promise.'

(e) BCO 27-2 and 57-3 presume the relationship of baptism and visible church membership. Such a connection between the covenant community and the sign of the covenant is systemic and fundamental, and it is not a valid or acceptable exception.

(3) Regarding Sabbath observance, the candidate writes in his 'exceptions':

'I take exception to the prescriptions for observance of Sabbath contained in the WCF Chapter XXI, Paragraph VIII, and questions 117 and 119 of the Larger Catechism.'

<!-- PAGE ga=11 pdf_page=142 printed_page=null -->

(a) Specifically, he rejects the prohibition of recreation and the admonition to give the ‘whole time over to public and private worship.’
(b) More crucial, however, is his inclusion in recreation permitted, commercial recreations without any explicit or implicit exceptions.
(c) Such exceptions violate the BCO 48-3 and 48-4 as well.

(4) In violation of WCF 28:3, which declares that ‘Baptism is rightly administered by pouring, or sprinkling water upon the person,’ the candidate affirms that baptism is also rightly administered by immersion. This violates BCO 56-6 which limits the mode to ‘pouring or sprinkling.’
(5) In violation of the BCO 7-2 and 9-3 the candidate believes the office of deacon is open to women as well as men.

The undersigned complainants do hereby complain against the action of the Presbytery of the Ascension and ask the General Assembly to sustain this complaint and declare the action of the September 11, 1982, meeting of the Presbytery of the Ascension in sustaining the trials for ordination of Mr. Kurt Lutjens annulled.

For the cause of Christ and His Kingdom
VAL H. BARLEMAN, RE
CARL W. BOGUE, TE
GEORGE R. CALER, RE
PETER STAZEN II, TE

## ADJUDICATION OF CASE 2

I. The complaint of RE Val H. Barleman, et al. against the Presbytery of Ascension in sustaining the trials for ordination of Mr. Kurt Lutjens at its September 11, 1982 meeting of Presbytery.
II. The Commission’s response to the specific reasons for the complaint is as follows:

A. The candidate took exception to BCO 58-4 ‘which restricts the invitation given at the Lord’s supper to session-approved persons or professing Christians who are’ communicants in good standing in any evangelical church.’ He believes it is illegitimate to include church membership as a requirement for one to participate in the Lord’s Supper. Sustained 7-4-0
B. Under examination the candidate refused to affirm that he would deny baptism to an allegedly professing adult who would not become a member of the visible church upon baptism. The constitutionality of this is denied. Sustained 6-4-1
C. Regarding Sabbath observance, the candidate writes in his ‘exceptions’: ‘I take exception to the prescriptions for observance of the Sabbath contained in the WCF Chapter XXI, Paragraph VIII, and questions 17 and 119 of the larger catechism.’ Not Sustained 1-9-1
D. In violation of WCF 28:3, which declares that ‘Baptism is rightly administered by pouring, or sprinkling water upon the person,’ the candidate affirms that baptism is also rightly administered by immersion. This violates BCO 56-6 which limits the mode to ‘pouring or sprinkling.’ Not Sustained 2-8-1
E. In violation of the BCO 7-2 and 9-3 the candidate believes the office of deacon is open to women as well as men.* Sustained 9-2-0
(*Note: Mr. Lutjens indicated that he would in practice comply with the BCO 7-2; 9-3)

## III. JUDGMENTS

1. The Commission sustains the complaint of Barleman et al. against the Presbytery of the Ascension in sustaining the trials for ordination of Mr. Kurt Lutjens at its September 11, 1982 meeting and declares the said action annulled. (Note: This judgment annulls the action of the presbytery in sustaining the trials for ordination but does not in itself annull Presbytery’s act of ordination, and so does not remove Mr. Lutjens from the roll of Presbytery). Adopted

<!-- PAGE ga=11 pdf_page=143 printed_page=null -->

# IV. RECOMMENDATIONS

1. That pastoral concern, care and prayer be exercised by Presbytery as it seeks to implement the directives given by the General Assembly.
*Adopted*

2. That Mr. Kurt Lutjens be given all love and instruction that he may come to appreciate, receive and adopt the Constitutional Standards of the PCA.
*Adopted*

3. That a Pastoral Committee composed of three complainants and two respondents in this case, be appointed by the Moderator of the Presbytery of the Ascension to guide and direct the implementation of Recommendation 2.
*Adopted*

4. The General Assembly directs the Presbytery of the Ascension to correct the aspects of the trial for ordination which are contrary to the Constitutional Standards of the PCA.
*Adopted*

5. That the Pastoral Committee be instructed by this General Assembly to pursue orderly discipline against Mr. Lutjens, if his views continue to fail to conform with the Word of God, the Standards of this Church, and the Book of Church Order, after due pastoral counsel.
*Adopted*

The following protest was received and ordered spread upon the record.

With respect for my brethren and fellow elders of the Eleventh General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America, I wish to express my protest of the General Assembly’s decision on Judicial Case 2 in accordance with Book of Church Order 45-2.

My reasons are that the specific reasons, A, B, and E, of the Commission’s response sustaining the complaint against Ascension Presbytery require of a candidate for ordination more than our ordination vows require.

**Reason E:** for a candidate to believe that Scriptures may be interpreted to allow the office of deacon to be open to women as well as men while his practice would be in accordance with the Form of Government’s prohibition of the office of deacon to women is not a contradicton of ordination vows 3 and 4 in Book of Church Order 21-5.

**Reasons A and B:** Although chapters 56, 57, and 58 of the Directory for Worship have been given full constitutional authority by the 1981 General Assembly, there are several aspects of their teaching that cannot be demonstrated to be required by Scripture, in accordance with the regulative principle of worship — for example, 58-5 indicates that the Lord’s table should be ‘decently covered’, that ‘wine’ (as opposed to grape juice?) should be used, and that ‘the Minister’ (rather than a ruling elder?) should set the elements apart by prayer and thanksgiving.

I offer a protest rather than merely a dissent because I believe it is a serious matter to place a man’s ordination in jeopardy over issues that are not contrary to his ordination vows or that are not demonstrable from Scripture.

WILLIAM S. BARKER, TE
St. Louis Presbytery

The following commissioners concurred in this protest.

Allen M. Barker III
Cal Boroughs
Donald F. Stam
Dan Hendley
Wayne Jamison
Frank P. Crane
Timothy B. Dobbins
Harold D. Hight
James K. Workman
Dan L. Semones
David F. Coffin, Jr.
C. Eugene Craven
Beryl T. Hubbard
Stephen D. Wood
Douglas Jasper
Charles B. Holliday III
Wm. D. McColley
Bob Martin
Lawrence E. Edison
DeWitt Watson
Ronald G. Lutjens
Leon D. Lovett III
David H. Linden
Richard W. Tyson
Bill C. Greenwalt
J. Robert Fiol
Dan Thompson
A. Kenneth Kuyk
Peter W. Anderson
Lance E. Hudgens
Ronald L. Shaw
Richard Tevebaugh
Clyde W. Powell
Donald M. Long
Patrick J. Vaughn
Robert H. Hamilton
Ronald A. Hedy
Arthur J. Grant
Edward T. Noe
E. Allen Duble
Gerald Malkus
Howard Griffith
William Harrell
Wayne Good
Russel G. Hailman
John W. Buswell
Douglas E. Lee

<!-- PAGE ga=11 pdf_page=144 printed_page=null -->

|  Robert A. McPherson | Daniel B. Ice | Morse Up De Graff  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  Edward (Ted) W. Powers | Bryan Chapell | Bruce E. Horts  |
|  Carl W. Quikling | Robert C. Sweet | Joel Belz  |
|  Bruce B. Howes | Jim Wiest | J. Robert Martin  |
|  Philip W. Solda |  |   |

D. Corey also wished to concur in this protest, adding to it these words, ‘These judgments are contrary to the use of the words ‘visible church’ as they are found in the Westminster Standards.’ Charles W. McNutt wished to concur in the protest without necessarily approving all the stated reasons.

On motion the Assembly directed the chairman of this Judicial Commission be directed to put an answer to the protest on the records along with it in accordance with BCO 45-3.

On motion the Assembly voted to permit the following statement to be entered on the record, and to direct the Chairman of this Judicial Commission to respond for the Assembly to this statement.

While fully respecting the wisdom of the General Assembly and deeply appreciating the spirit and work of its Judicial Commission, I believe that an incorrect decision has been rendered which will cause harm to the ministry of several presbyters and lead to harm the life of the Presbytery of the Ascension and possibly other presbyteries.

My reasons for this dissent are:

1. The Presbytery did not ask for the Assembly to necessarily agree with the candidate’s views but to allow them as exceptions.
2. The Bible is the only infallible rule of faith and practice. It is inerrant and totally authoritative. While chapters 56, 57, and 58 of the Directory for Worship have ‘full constitutional authority’, this does not make them Scripture. These chapters have only been authoritative for two years and include provisions which are reasonable and generally in conformity to Scripture. However, there are many things that are in addition to Scripture. This decision makes some of those additions grounds for judging whether a man is worthy for ordination in the PCA. That makes the Directory for Worship too important.
3. This Assembly has not taken a position regarding the question of exceptions to the Westminster Standards. It is evident that there is a division of opinion within the Assembly over the question of the strictness of subscription to the Confessional standards. However, this decision goes beyond that question and in effect requires subscription to details of the Directory of Worship. These details are reasonable but are details that the Westminster Divines did not think were to be included in the Confession or Catechisms, and above all, that God did not choose to specify in the Bible. The Directory of Worship should not be treated as an inerrant, authoritative rule of faith and practice.
4. The subject of the possibility of women serving as deacons has been widely discussed. Simply because a man believes that this might be permitted by Scripture, should not disqualify him from serving as a teaching elder in the PCA. This is especially true when a man has made it clear that he would abide by the will of the Church in this matter.
5. We have vowed to work for the peace of the Church. The results of this decision will be a disruption in the life of the young man who was ordained, debilitating to the mission church which he serves and a source of great confusion in our whole Presbytery.
6. There ought to be a better way to decide issues of doctrinal subscription. No debate is permitted, but this is not a case of morality or sin but of the PCA’s own position. We should decide our standards with much thought and discussion. We should not decide them by cases affecting the life and ministries of individuals.

Signed: John P. MacRae, Nick E. Protos, Dale B. Welden, Arnold F. Frank

The response of the Assembly, prepared by TE George H. Long, Chairman of the Commission, was as follows.

**On Reason 1.** The parameters for exceptions is the basic issue, one which the Assembly has been unwilling to rule upon in general, leaving it to judicial process in individual cases. The Commission is aware that church membership is not always mentioned in invitations to the Lord’s Supper, but Mr. Lutjens does not casually omit membership as a condition but consciously believes that ‘the requirement of church membership represents an obscuring of that free

<!-- PAGE ga=11 pdf_page=145 printed_page=null -->

grace’. We understand that his conscience will not allow him to use the words about church membership in the invitation, indicating a real problem in his mind with them.

**On Reason 2.** The Directory for Worship is a part of our Constitution, and the Commission understood that we were to judge by the Constitution, not determine which parts of it are authoritative.

**On Reason 3.** While the Assembly has not ruled generally on the exceptions to Standards that would be acceptable, it does expect Commissions to decide in individual cases. This the Commission felt required to do.

**On Reason 4.** The Commission first voted 4-6-1 against sustaining the specification of error re women serving as deacons, and later reconsidered, voting 9-2-0 that the position that women deacons are scriptural is contrary to our BCO as it now stands. It was noted that Mr. Lutjens indicated a willingness to comply with the BCO on this matter. The Commission had difficulty understanding why he could comply with BCO in this instance but could not comply with the use of wording in BCO 58-7 RE the Lord’s Supper.

The chairman of the Commission was among the minority in the 8-3 vote to sustain the Complaint, which is the reason he requested Chaplain Rott to make and defend the report, but has endeavored to summarize fairly the gist of hours spent by the Commission in earnest, prayerful, and conscientious deliberation.

Respectfully submitted,

GEORGE W. LONG

TE David F. Coffin, Jr. rose to explain that he would vote against each and every case before the Assembly on the basis that he objected in principle to requesting the Assembly to vote concerning questions where there has not been sufficient time or information to make a reasonable decision.

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
