# Case p299 — a complaint of re roy J. Wuckovich v. Central Carolina Presbytery; el aL v. the Presbytery; an appeal of re george K. McLeod v. Gulf Coast Presbytery

**Court:** CJB  ·  **Assembly:** 12th (1984)  ·  **Disposition:** out_of_order  ·  **BCO cited:**  14-2 40-5 

*Source: [ga12_1984 p. 299](../markdown/ga12_1984.md)*

---

29. That Overture 22 from Western Carolinas Presbytery regarding BCO 14-2 be referred to the Committee
of Commissioners on Judicial Business with the recommendation that it be referred to the Committee on
Administration.
30. That Case 1, a complaint of re roy J. Wuckovich against Central Carolina Presbytery, be found in
order and that a judicial commission be elected to adjudicate the matter.
31. That Case 2, a complaint byte russell D. Toms, el aL against the Presbytery of Central Florida, be
found in order and that a judicial commission be elected to adjudicate the matter.
32. That Case 3, an appeal of re george K. McLeod against Gulf Coast Presbytery be found not in order
because the appellant is no longer a member of the Presbyterian Church in America. (On December 17, 1983,
the church of which Mr. McLeod is a member, voted to withdraw from the PCA.)
33. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business regarding Constitutional Inquiry 1 be ratified.
(see I,D,1 above)
34. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business regarding Constitutional Inquiry 2 be ratified.
(see I,D,2 above)
35. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business regarding Constitutional Inquiry 3 be ratified.
(see I,D,3 above)
36. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business regarding Constitutional Inquiry 4 be ratified.
(see I,D,4 above)
37. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business regarding Constitutional Inquiry 5 be ratified.
(see I,D,5 above)
38. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business regarding Constitutional Inquiry 6 be ratified.
(see I,D,6 above)
39. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business regarding Constitutional Inquiry 7 be ratified.
(see I,D,7 above)
40. That the question of church-state relations particularly with reference to the taxation of the church be
referred to the General Assembly with the request that a study committee of appropriate theological and legal
expertise be appointed.
41. That the opinion of the Committee on Judicial Business regarding the intention of 1983 “Grandfather
Clause” stated in the advice given the Stated Clerk be ratified (see I,E, 1 above).
42. That the letter of Ruling Elders John Breeding and Richard Judkins regarding an action of Delmarva
Presbytery be found not in order as a complaint but that it be referred to the Committee on the Review and
Control of Presbyteries to be handled on the basis of BCO 40-5.

SUPPLEMENT A

I. NARRATIVE:

The Rules for Assembly Operation (5-6) specify that overtures not received before April 19, 1984, shall not
be considered by the Assembly. The Committee on Judicial Business, in order to conclude the assignments given
by the Eleventh General Assembly and the consideration of all communications received prior to April19—
(note that certain judicial matters such as cases may be received as late as June 18), has met by telephone
conference call May 3, 1984, and May 24, 1984. Because a constitutional inquiry was received in the Stated
Clerk’s office too late to be considered at our May 24, 1984, meeting, the committee is to meet again June 18,
1984, at the 5:00 p.m. recess of the General Assembly.
May 24, 1984, is the latest that the committee has had to meet and such a late meeting points out, in part,
the necessity for this Committee to be able to begin its work as soon after the Assembly as possible. The
Committee realizes that it was entirely within the providence of God that it was not able to meet to carry out
its business until after the first of 1984. But it believes too that it may be advisable for the Assembly to consider
establishing contingency plans to allow the Committee to meet even if the Committee on Administration should
be required to curtail some of its responsibilities should there ever again be occasion when the Church does not
provide the necessary financial resources.
The matters of business considered by the committee subsequent to the printing of the primary Report are,
as follows:

A. ASSIGNMENTS BY THE ELEVENTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY:

1. Reconsidered the proposal for ordaining teaching elders in foreign countries at the request of the coordinato
of the Committee on Mission to the World. See amended Recommendation 8.

2. Concluded a first draft revision of the Directory for the Worship of God. See Recommendation 43.
3. Propose amendments to the BCO for the Calling of Missionaries. See Recommendation 44.
4. Recommend amendments to the BCO harmonizing a proposal to provide for examination for licensure by
a committee of a presbytery (Overture 10 to the 11th Assembly) and BCO 21-4. See Recommendation
45.
5. Review and evaluate (under the provisions of BCO 40) the 1982 Minutes of Western Carolinas Presbytery.
See Recommendations 46, 47, 48, 49, and 50.

B. OVERTURES TO THE TWELFTH GENERAL ASSEMBLY:

1. Overture 27 from Delmarva Presbytery regarding BCO 14-2, a delegated Assembly. See Recommendation
51.
2. Overture 28 from Delmarva Presbytery regarding a study of the question of women in the diaconate. See
Recommendation 52.
3. Overture 29 from Delmarva Presbytery regarding BCO 23-1, pastoral succession. See Recommendation
53.
4. Overture 30 from James River Presbytery regarding section 11(1) of the Preface of the BCO. See
Recommendation 54.
5. Overture 31 from St. louis presbytery regarding Westminster Confession of Faith, Chapter XXI, Section
V, “singing of psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs with grace in the heart.” See Recommendation 55.
6. Overture 32 from Covenant Presbytery regarding BCO 13-9, the dissolution and dismissal of churches by
a presbytery. See Recommendation 56.
7. Overture 33 from Covenant Presbytery regarding BCO 11-4, the limitation of the powers of the higher
courts. See Recommendation 57.
8. Overture 35 from Covenant Presbytery regarding Regional Judicial Commissions. See Recommendation
58.
9. Overture 38 from St. Louis Presbytery regarding the Theological Examination of Coordinators and others.
See Recommendation 59.
10. Overture 39 from St. Louis Presbytery regarding the granting of special certificates of ordination. See
Recommendation 60.
11. Overture 40 from St. Louis Presbytery regarding the amendment and repeal of BCO 56, 57, and 58. See
Recommendations 61 and 62.
12. Overture 41 from St. Louis Presbytery regarding an extended debate/discussion at the Twelfth General Assembly on the question of confessional subscription. See Recommendation 63.
13. Overture 43 from Grace Presbytery regarding BCO 15-3, Regional Judicial Commissions. See Recommendation 64.
14. Overture 44 from the Sessions of the Bay Street and First Presbyterian Churches of Hattiesburg, Mississippi
regarding the rejection of the amendment of BCO 24-9, elders and deacons emeritus, by the Twelfth
General Assembly. See Recommendation 65.
15. Overture 46 from New Jersey Presbytery regarding BCO 6-5, 20-3, 24-3, and 25-1, minimum voting age
for members of the congregation. See Recommendation 66.
16. Overture 48 from Central Georgia Presbytery regarding BCO 14-2, a representative Assembly. See
Recommendation 67.
17. Overture 49 from Texas Presbytery regarding BCO amendments to allow a congregation to set minimum
voting ages for members of the congregation. See Recommendation 68.
18. Overture 51 from Westminster Presbytery regarding BCO 14-2, a representative Assembly, and 10-3,
expenses of ruling and teaching elders at Assembly. See Recommendation 69.

### C. JUDICIAL CASES

1. Case 4: Complaint of TE Carl W. Bogue, et al., against Ascension Presbytery. See Recommendation 70.
2. Case 5: Complaint of RE Robert C. Peterson, et. al., against Ascension Presbytery. See Recommendation
71.
3. Case 6: Complaint of TE Warren Gardner, et al against North Georgia Presbytery. See Recommendation
72.
4. Case 7: Complaint of TE Carl W. Bogue, eL al., against Ascension Presbytery. See Recommendation 73.

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
