# 5 — TE S. Michael Preg, Jr., et al. v. Missouri Presbytery

**Court:** Committee on Judicial Business (CJB)  ·  **Assembly:** 13th (1985)  ·  **Disposition:** sustained (16-0 vote)  ·  **Dissent:** yes

*Source: [ga13_1985 pp. 104–132](../markdown/ga13_1985.md#ga13-p104)*

---

5. Case 5: Item 13-61 — “Preg et al. vs. Missouri Presbytery”: . . . that the complaint be found in order and that the following judicial commission be elected to adjudicate the matter. The committee nominates the following commissioners:

**Teaching Elders**
Robert Auffarth, Delmarva, Convener
Steve Bostrom, Calvary
Robert (Ric) Cannada, Covenant
Fred Marsh, Mississippi Valley
Henry Mueller, Gulf Coast
Randy Nabors, Tennessee Valley
John Pickett, Pacific Northwest
Richard Tyson, Philadelphia

**Ruling Elders**
Clark Breeding, North Texas
Donald Comer, Central Georgia
Gary Flye, Southwest
Robert Hazlep, Evangel
Charles LeSuer, Ascension
Jerry Neas, Westminster
Robert Szwierb, Great Lakes
James Zetler, Southern Florida

**Alternates**
David Brown, Pacific
Carl Derk, Philadelphia
Eugene Friedline, James River
John Greene, Warrior

Adopted

(See 13-63, p. 127 for Adjudication of the Case.)

*— — —*

13-63 Report of Judicial Commission Adjudicating Case #5.

TE Robert F. Auffarth, chairman, led in prayer and presented the Commission's report of Judicial Case #5: TE S. Michael Preg, Jr. et al. vs. Missouri Presbytery.

CASE #5

Case #5: Complaint of TE S. Michael Preg et al. Against Missouri Presbytery

Whereas, Missouri Presbytery in its regular stated meeting on April 19 and 20, 1985, at the Westminster Reformed Presbyterian Church, 341 W. Clayton Road, Ballwin, MO 63011, considered an overture from the Session, Westminster Reformed Presbyterian Church requesting that Presbytery take action to delete from its Standing Rules the entire paragraph requiring its Committee on Care of the Churches to “Conduct yearly visits to each church . . .” and furthermore, that Presbytery rescind its action of January 19, 1985 in adopting a “Plan for Church Visitation,”

Whereas, Missouri Presbytery failed to take this action requested by the attached overture,

Whereas, Missouri Presbytery in the establishment and empowering of a standing committee of Presbytery to regularly and systematically visit its member churches and meet with the Sessions, Diaconates, etc., in the absence of problems, appeals or requests from the lower court or other immediate justification for such visits continues to be beyond the scope of the powers granted to Presbytery by the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America (BCO 13-9),

<!-- PAGE ga=13 pdf_page=130 printed_page=null -->

And Whereas, this complaint having been made to Missouri Presbytery in accordance with *BCO Chapter 43* was denied by Presbytery at its called meeting at the Covenant Presbyterian Church, 2143 N. Ballas Road, Town and Country, MO 63131, on May 25, 1985,

Therefore, we, the undersigned, make this complaint to the 13th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America against Missouri Presbytery in failing to take the requested action at its regular, stated meeting on April 19 and 20, 1985 or at its called meeting of May 25, 1985 to delete the pertinent section of its Standing Rules and rescind its action of January 19, 1985 in adopting a “Plan for Church Visitation” in order that its operations would be in conformity with the powers granted to Presbytery by the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America (*BCO* 13-9).

Respectfully submitted,

TE S. Michael Preg, Jr.
RE E. Allen Duble
TE Lawrence N. Lunceford
RE John Venezia
TE Melvin Farrar
RE John (Jack) Barker

Attachment to Complaint of S. Michael Preg et al. against Missouri Presbytery

**Overture from the Session, Westminster Reformed Presbyterian Church to Missouri Presbytery**

Whereas, Missouri Presbytery has enacted Standing Rules which require its Committee on Care of the Churches to “Conduct yearly visits to each church including at least one visit with the session for discussion of the welfare of the church, such discussion to follow an outline made in advance to the session. Visits to deacons meetings, congregational meeting, worship services, etc. are also encouraged . . .”

Whereas, Missouri Presbytery meeting on Saturday, January 19, 1985 at the Memorial Presbyterian Church adopted a “Plan for Church Visitation” to implement its Standing Rules and that such “Plan” states, “The purpose of church visits is to inquire as to the spiritual welfare of the church and to discern any ways that presbytery may be able to assist the church . . .”

Whereas, the establishment and empowering of a standing committee of Presbytery to regularly and systematically visit its member churches and meet with their Sessions, Diaconates, etc. in the absence of problems, appeals, requests from the lower court or other immediate justification for such visits is beyond the scope of the powers granted to Presbytery by the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America (*BCO* 13-9).

Whereas, such regular and unjustified visits will be time-consuming, disruptive and potentially injurious to the spiritual welfare, order, peace and harmony of the lower court and local church.

Therefore, we respectfully request that Missouri Presbytery take action to delete from its Standing Rules the entire paragraph requiring its Committee on Care of the Churches to “Conduct yearly visits to each church . . .” and furthermore, that Presbytery rescind its action of January 19, 1985 in adopting a “Plan for Church Visitation”.

Respectfully submitted,

Gordon Shaw, Clerk of Session

## ADJUDICATION OF CASE #5

### I. Statement of the Facts

A. On January 19, 1985, Missouri Presbytery adopted a “Plan for Church Visitation” as an implementation of one of the functions of its “Committee on Care of the Churches,” calling for a required annual visit of each session and congregation by said committee.

B. The Session of the Westminster Reformed Presbyterian Church (WRPC) filed an overture at the next presbytery meeting on April 19 and 20, 1985, asking that the provisions of the “Standing Rules” for the required yearly visits be deleted and the “Plan for Church Visitation” rescinded, on the grounds that “such visits are beyond the scope of powers granted to the Presbytery . . . (*BCO* 13-9).” The presbytery answered the overture in the negative.

<!-- PAGE ga=13 pdf_page=131 printed_page=null -->

C. A complaint of similar wording was filed with the presbytery and answered in the negative at a called meeting of the presbytery on May 25, 1985.

D. A complaint of similar wording was then filed with the Thirteenth General Assembly by the WRPC session, was received by the Assembly and assigned to this Commission for adjudication.

## II. Statement of the Issues

At the heart of the issue is whether a higher court has taken action affecting a lower court in areas not expressly authorized by the BCO. The question in the present complaint is whether the presbytery may require a visit by a presbytery committee on pastoral concern to a session and a congregation against the wishes of the session and in the absence of any evident problem.

## III. Judgement of the Case

The Commission voted (16-0) to sustain the complaint and to instruct the presbytery by its normal process to bring its Standing Rules and procedures into conformity with BCO, as interpreted by this ruling.

Grounds: BCO 11-4 clearly limits the authority of the higher court to specific areas listed in the BCO.

## IV. Explanatory Opinion

BCO 11-4 reads in part, “The jurisdiction of these courts is limited by the express provisions of the Constitution.” In the opinion of the Commission, BCO 13-9 contains no express provision, which meaning is clear and undebatable, as would permit a presbytery to require the receiving of a presbytery committee’s visit without a request by or a specific problem in the session or congregation in question.

Believing that the presbytery has acted out of a deep pastoral concern for her member churches, the Commission commends the desire of the presbytery for improved pastoral oversight, and wishes to encourage appropriate action to such an end on a voluntary basis.

However, the Commission also wishes to protect lower courts from any possible encroachment, implied or otherwise, by higher courts, and beyond the express powers given to those higher courts in the BCO. Adopted

Members of the Commission:

|  **Teaching Elders** | **Ruling Elders**  |
| --- | --- |
|  Robert Auffarth, Delmarva, Chairman | Clark Breeding, North Texas  |
|  David Brown, Pacific | Donald Comer, Central Georgia  |
|  Stephen Bostrom, Calvary | Gary Flye, Southwest  |
|  Robert (Ric) Cannada, Covenant | Eugene Friedline, James River  |
|  Fred Marsh, Miss. Valley, Secretary | Robert Hezlep, Evangel  |
|  Henry Mueller, Gulf Coast | Charles LeSuer, Ascension  |
|  A. Randy Nabors, Tennessee Valley | Jerry Neas, Westminster  |
|  John Pickett, Pacific Northwest | Robert Swierzb, Great Lakes  |

The following requested their negative votes be recorded: TEs James M. Pickett, J. Curtis Lovelace, Joseph A. Pipa, Jr., Roland S. Barnes, David R. Dively, James E. Urish, Robert A. McPherson, William S. Barker, James K. Workman, and James A. Meek.

## MINUTES OF JUDICIAL COMMISSION OF CASE #5

All parties to the case being present, the convener, Robert Auffarth, called the meeting to order at 2:35 p.m., on June 18, 1985, in the St. George Room, with prayer led by Steve Bostrom.

The following Commissioners were present:

|  **Presbytery** | **Commissioner**  |
| --- | --- |
|  Ascension | RE Charles LeSuer  |
|  Calvary | TE Stephen Bostrom  |
|  Central Georgia | RE Donald Comer  |

<!-- PAGE ga=13 pdf_page=132 printed_page=null -->

|  Central Georgia | TE John Pickett  |
| --- | --- |
|  Covenant | TE Robert (Ric) Cannada  |
|  Delmarva | TE Robert Auffarth, Chairman  |
|  Evangel | RE Robert Hezlep  |
|  Great Lakes | RE Robert Swierzb  |
|  Gulf Coast | TE Henry Mueller  |
|  Mississippi Valley | TE Frederick Marsh, Secretary  |
|  North Texas | RE Clark Breeding  |
|  Southwest | RE Gary Flye  |
|  Tennessee Valley | TE Raddy Nabors  |
|  Westminster | RE Jerry Neas  |
|  **Alternates** |   |
|  James River | RE Eugene Friedline  |
|  Pacific | TE David Brown  |
|  Philadelphia | TE Carl Derk  |

Robert Auffarth was elected chairman; Fred Marsh was elected secretary.

Introduced as parties to the complaint were Michael Preg, Jr., Mark Belz, and Gordon Shaw. Respondents were George Knight, Cal Boroughs, and Don McCoy.

The following documents were presented and reviewed by the Commission:

1. “Attachment A:” a copy of the Missouri Presbytery ‘Standing Rules’ “Committee on Care of the Churches”.

2. “Attachment B:” a copy of the “Plan for Church Visitation”, adopted by Missouri Presbytery on January 19, 1985.

3. Overture from the Westminster Reformed Presbyterian Church Session (WRPC), received and acted upon in the negative at the April 19, 20, 1985, meeting of Missouri Presbytery.

4. Complaint of the WRPC Session received and acted upon in the negative at the May 25, 1985, meeting of Missouri Presbytery.

5. Complaint of the WRPC Session to the Thirteenth General Assembly.

6. A paper by Donald J. MacNair, “The Plan for Church Visitation”. (The Commission was recessed from 3:00 to 3:20 p.m. in order to secure copies of this paper for the Commission.)

7. Copies of relevant portions of the Missouri Presbytery minutes.

8. Letter of March 24, 1984 (should be 1985), to Mike Preg from Gene Frank, with enclosed list of topics for discussion.

Following discussion of procedure, it was moved and carried that the Commission proceed with hearing the case, noting that Constitutional Inquiry 12, p. 245, of the report of the Committee on Judicial Business, is also relevant to the case and that therefore the Commission Chairman would confer with the Chairman of the Committee of Commissioners on Judicial Business as to how best to bring the matter to the Assembly.

Mike Preg and Mark Belz spoke in behalf of the WRPC Session as the complaining party.

George Knight, Don McCoy and Cal Boroughs spoke in behalf of the Presbytery as the responding party.

Following an extended time of questioning by Commission members, closing arguments were called for by motion.

The meeting was recessed with prayer by Bob Auffarth at 5:10 p.m.

The meeting was reconvened with prayer by Fred Marsh at 8:30 p.m., with all Commission members present except alternate Carl Derk.

The Chairman reported that the Judicial Business report would be brought to the Assembly after the Assembly’s hearing of this case. Copies of a decision of the Twelfth General Assembly regarding a Northeast Presbytery visitation committee were distributed to the Commission.

The Commission discussed the case at some length.

The complaint was sustained by a vote of 16-0, and Bob Auffarth, Fred Marsh, and Ric Cannada were elected to frame a draft of the Commission report. The meeting was recessed at 10:00 p.m. with prayer by Clark Breeding.

The Commission was reconvened with prayer by Henry Mueller at 10:00 a.m. on June 19, 1985, in the Tudor Room.

The final report was prepared and approved. Minutes of the meeting were read and approved. The meeting was adjourned with prayer by Ric Cannada at 10:40 a.m.

Respectfully submitted,
Robert Auffarth, Chairman
Fred Marsh, Secretary

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
