# Case p118 — Judicial case (GA 13, p.118)

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 13th (1985)  ·  **Disposition:** out_of_order

*Source: [ga13_1985 p. 118](../markdown/ga13_1985.md)*

---

consider a change in their boundaries and to indicate what the new boundary should be. (See Communication 2, p. 38.) Adopted

25. That Communications 3 and 4 (p. 38) stating the actions taken by the presbyteries of Southeast Alabama and Warrior to change their boundary be approved. Adopted
26. That Overture 21 (p. 51) be adopted in order to place the Hawaiian Islands outside the boundaries of Pacific Presbytery, so that the work of the PCA there might come under the supervision of the GA Committee on MNA.
27. That the Assembly proceed at this time to extend the boundaries of Northeast Presbytery to include all of New England, and that action concerning changing boundaries in New York state be deferred until resolution of the issue involving "Joining and Receiving" with the OPC. (Overture 40, p. 52.) Adopted
28. That Overture 37 (p. 52) be adopted. The GA requests the MNA committee to identify resources and training materials on ministry to the deaf, assemble these materials and make them available to local churches for implementing ministries in their churches. Adopted
29. That Overtures 11 and 25 (p. 51) concerning boundary changes between the presbyteries of Central Florida and Southern Florida be adopted. Adopted
30. That Personal Resolution 1 (p. 64) from Frank E. Hamilton be answered by recommendation 12. Adopted
31. That Personal Resolution 12 to the Eleventh General Assembly (p. 64) from Frederick Fowler be answered with reference to recommendation 9b. Adopted
32. That the minutes of the Permanent Committee on MNA June 18, 1984, September 6, 1984, and December 6, 1984, be approved with notations; that February 28-March 1, 1985 be approved without notation. Adopted
33. That Overture 41 (p. 52) from Louisiana Presbytery concerning the extension of its boundary be adopted. Ruled out of order
34. That the report as a whole be adopted. Adopted

Respectfully submitted,

Leonard Bullock, Chairman

Roger Hunt, Secretary

Robert Ferguson, Assistant Secretary

Roll of Commissioners present:

Presbytery

Calvary

Central Carolina

Central Florida

Central Georgia

Covenant

Delmarva

Evangel

Grace

Great Lakes

Gulf Coast

Mississippi Valley

Missouri

New Jersey

Commissioner

TE David Sinclair

TE Clyde Godwin

TE Leonard Bullock, Chairman

TE William C. Douglas

RE Harry Crow

TE Philip D. Douglass

TE Taylor McGown

RE Carey Hauenstein

TE Mark Dalbey

TE Robert C. Wilson

TE Jeffrey Weir

TE Roger Hunt, Secretary

TE Kenneth A. Smith

New River
RE Virgil B. Roberts
North Georgia
RE Bill Stevenson
Pacific
TE Robert Ferguson, Asst. Sec.
Pacific Northwest
RE Don Dickson
Palmetto
TE H. R. Patterson
South Texas
TE J. Alcide LaCour III
Southern Florida
TE Howard A. Eyrich
Warrior
TE William F. Joseph III
Western Carolinas
RE James Banks
Alternate
RE John Green

13-50 Partial Report of the Committee of Commissioners on Judicial Business.
RE Robert Taylor, chairman, led in prayer and continued the Committee's report. Recommendations 16-23 were handled at this time. See 13-45, p. 104ff for the full report.

13-50A Recess.
The Assembly recessed with prayer by RE William Shirey at 5:00 p.m.

MINUTES — WEDNESDAY EVENING
June 19, 1985
Eighth Session

13-51 Reconvening and Memorial Worship Service.
The Assembly was reconvened at 7:30 p.m and joined in worship according to the following order.
PRELUDE — "Come, Sweetest Death, Come, Blessed Rest" TE Lawrence Roff, Organist
CALL TO WORSHIP TE James M. Baird, Jr.
HYMN — "The Church's One Foundation Is Jesus Christ Our Lord"
INVOCATION TE James M. Baird, Jr.
EXPLANATION OF SERVICE TE Morton H. Smith
ANTHEM — "My Eternal King" Covenant College Singers
SOLO — "Psalm 23" Tim Wilds
READING OF NAMES OF MINISTERS DECEASED SINCE 12TH ASSEMBLY TE Morton H. Smith

|  Harold Albert Rapp | July 13, 1984 | Missouri  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  Floyd William Shiery | August 29, 1984 | Louisiana  |
|  Robert Clarence Smoot, Jr. | September 14, 1984 | Delmarva  |
|  John Kemp Hobson | November 10, 1984 | Tennessee Valley  |
|  Paul E. Rowland | November 26, 1984 | Central Georgia  |
|  John Lockwood Palmer | December 12, 1984 | New Jersey  |
|  John McMillan Kay, Jr. | December 28, 1984 | New Jersey  |
|  William E. Shannon | December 29, 1984 | Palmetto  |
|  Alexander Kay Davison | March 1, 1985 | Ascension  |
|  Arthur Frost Williams | March 30, 1985 | Western Carolinas  |

SCRIPTURE READING — from John 17 TE James M. Baird, Jr.
SEASON OF PRAYER AND LORD'S PRAYER
HYMN — "For All the Saints Who From Their Labors Rest"
PRAYER AND BENEDICTION TE James M. Baird, Jr.

13-52 Special Greetings.
TE R. Laird Harris introduced TE Pyeng Seh Oh, chairman of the Fraternal Relations Committee of the Presbyterian Church in Korea, who addressed the Assembly.

## 13-53 Committee on Nominations.

TE William J. Stanway, chairman, led in prayer and presented the Committee’s report. The following were elected.

### Administration

**Teaching Elders**
Ruling Elders

**Class of 1989**
Donald J. MacNair, Missouri
Randall W. Stone, Missouri

**Alternates**
William S. Henderson, Northeast
Alexander Q. Smith, W. Carolinas

### Christian Education and Publications

**Teaching Elders**
Ruling Elders

**Class of 1989**
John S. Ragland, Grace
Kenneth W. Orr, Pacific
Mark Brink, Covenant

**Alternates**
J. Stephen Jussely, Grace
Michael Littlejohn, Eastern Carolina

### Mission to North America

**Teaching Elders**
Ruling Elders

**Class of 1989**
W. Wilson Benton, Jr., Covenant
Robert Jenkins, Delmarva
Richard H. Tilton, Philadelphia

**Alternates**
Richard Downing, Southern Florida
Murdock Campbell, Gulf Coast

### Mission to the World

**Teaching Elders**
Ruling Elders

**Class of 1989**
Harold E. Burkhart, Philadelphia
Robert F. Auffarth, Delmarva
Gerald W. Sovereign, Gulf Coast

**Alternates**
Robert G. Rayburn, Missouri
James Banks, Jr., Western Carolinas

### Assembly Theological Examining Committee

**Teaching Elders**
Ruling Elders

**Class of 1988**
O. Palmer Robertson, Delmarva
Bruce Kitchen, Jr., Central Georgia

**Alternates**
Peter R. Doyle, Southeast Alabama
V. Stephen Overstreet, Great Lakes

### Interchurch Relations

**Teaching Elders**
Ruling Elders

**Class of 1988**
Leon F. Wardell, James River
Jack D. Merry, Northeast

**Alternates**
William J. Larkin, Jr., Palmetto
Donald E. Boerema, Central Florida

## Judicial Business

*Teaching Elders*
*Ruling Elders*

**Class of 1989**
Robert M. Ferguson, Pacific
John G. Thompson, Westminster

**Alternates**
Henry J. Mueller, Gulf Coast
Mark Belz, Missouri

## Trustees for Insurance, Annuities, and Relief Funds

*Teaching Elders*
*Ruling Elders*

**Class of 1990**
Douglas Haskew, Evangel
Dale S. White, James River

**Class of 1987**
David Jussely, Mississippi Valley
Louis S. Philhower, Central Georgia

## Trustees for PCA Foundation

*Teaching Elders*
*Ruling Elders*

**Class of 1989**
Ross A. Bair, Southern Florida
David S. Huggins, Jr., Tennessee Valley

## Trustees for Ridge Haven

*Teaching Elders*
*Ruling Elders*

**Class of 1990**
Gordon K. Reed, Central Georgia
Howard J. Hokrein, Central Georgia

**Class of 1989**
Edward T. Noe, Philadelphia

**Class of 1987**
Newton J. Brooks, Gulf Coast
Royce G. Waites, Palmetto

**Class of 1986**
George Long, Jr., Tennessee Valley
Rene Schmidt, Southern Florida

## Trustees for Covenant College

*Teaching Elders*
*Ruling Elders*

**Class of 1989**
J. Render Caines, Tennessee Valley
Allen Mawhinney, Pacific
James Conrad, Jr., Southern Florida
William McKay, Western Carolinas
Robert D. Gray, Delmarva
Wendell Graves (OPC)
William Hall, Central Florida

**Class of 1987**
Stephen W. Leonard, Pacific Northwest

## Trustees for Covenant Theological Seminary

*Teaching Elders*
*Ruling Elders*

**Class of 1989**
Richard W. Tyson, Philadelphia
Richard Ellingsworth, Delmarva
G. Paul Jones, Jr., Central Georgia
James B. Orders, Jr., Calvary
Robert F. Struck, Evangel
W. Lee Troup, Ascension

**Class of 1988**
Robert N. Taylor, Pacific

## 13-54 Partial Report of the Committee of Commissioners on Judicial Business.

The Assembly joined in singing “Crown Him With Many Crowns”, and RE Robert Taylor led in prayer and continued the Committee’s report. Recommendations 24-33 were handled at this time. See 13-45, p. 105ff for the entire report.

## 13-55 Recess.

The order of the day was called and the Assembly voted to recess. TE J. Render Caines led in closing prayer at 10:25 p.m.

MINUTES — THURSDAY MORNING

June 20, 1985

Ninth Session

## 13-56 Reconvening and Worship.

The Assembly reconvened at 8:00 a.m. with worship under the direction of Evangel Presbytery. The Covenant College Singers began the service, and then all joined to sing “Let Us Love, and Sing, and Wonder”. Prayer was offered by TE Paul Alexander. Following two anthems by the Singers, TE Frank M. Barker, Jr. preached the sermon and concluded the service with prayer.

## 13-57 Committee on Judicial Business and Ad Interim Committee on the General Assembly.

TE Rodney T. King, Chairman of the Committee on Judicial Business, reported for the Committee beginning with prayer. The Assembly voted to receive this response to the constitutional inquiry:

Response to the Report of the Ad-Interim Committee on General Assembly Structure.

A. The proposed new procedure of Judicial Process.

The new procedure raises the constitutional question whether the General Assembly can properly commit matters to a commission, which commission’s actions are the actions of the court without the option of veto by the court (WCF XXXI:3). The PCA, in its formation, consciously avoided this procedure.

On the other hand, the new process, allows:

- **a)** appeal to a General Assembly regional judicial commission;
- **b)** appeal to and review by the General Assembly’s Permanent Judicial Commission;
- **c)** control by General Assembly through the nomination and election procedure which is similar to the control currently exercised over trustees of agencies in the PCA (eg. GA Bylaws IV Section 1-2-d).

## Recommendation:

That the General Assembly refer the matter back to the Ad-Interim Committee, that the church at large respond to the committee before January 1, 1986, and that the committee report to the Fourteenth General Assembly. Adopted

B. The Proposal for a Representative General Assembly

The Committee on Judicial Business finds no constitutional irregularities with the proposal of the Ad-Interim Committee.

## Recommendation:

That the Assembly find the proposal in order.

Adopted

RE W. Jack Williamson continued the Ad Interim Committee’s report. A period of general questioning from the floor was followed by the Assembly moving into a committee of the whole. Straw votes were taken indicating 1) overwhelming support for the concept of a representative assembly and 2) a smaller majority of support for the plan presented by the Ad Interim Committee. The Assembly then moved out of the committee of the whole. Mr. Chewning returned to the chair, and by common consent the Assembly proceeded to the following votes:

## Recommendations:

1. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business regarding Constitutional Inquiry (Appendix I, I.C.1, p. 245) from the Ad-Interim Committee be ratified; that the proposed amendments touching both judicial process and representative assembly (Appendix P, p. 313) be referred back to the Ad-Interim Committee; and that it be noted that the proposal of the Ad-Interim Committee’s report marks a radical departure from the original tenets of the Presbyterian Church in America. Adopted (Clerk’s note: By this action the Assembly adopted A and B above.)

2. That the Ad-Interim Committee be continued for an additional year to report to the Fourteenth General Assembly, that the Stated Clerk add to the Ad Interim Committee four additional members who have some differences with the report and who would bring other perspectives to the Committee, and that all future recommendations of the Committee be communicated to the presbyteries at least 90 days before the next General Assembly. Adopted (Clerk’s note: See § 13-9, p. 70 and § 13-21, p. 83.)

## 13-58 Report of the Committee of Commissioners on Insurance, Annuities, and Relief.

RE James E. Hughes, director of the Insurance, Annuities and Relief Funds, led in prayer and began the report. RE Thomas Leopard, chairman of the Board of Trustees, addressed the Assembly. TE Bruce B. Howes, chairman of the Committee of Commissioners, then presented the report.

## I. Business Referred to the Committee

A. Minutes of the Meeting of the Board of Trustees dated June 18, 1984, August 3-4, 1984, November 2-3, 1984, and March 1-2, 1985.

B. Audit Report dated December 31, 1984 by Kent, Nobles, and Martin, Certified Public Accountants.

C. Report of the Board of Trustees of the Insurance, Annuities, and Relief Funds to the Thirteenth General Assembly.

## II. Major Issues Discussed:

A. The above referenced minutes and reports were discussed in detail with members of the Board of Trustees. Numerous matters were also discussed with the Board of Trustees in reference to the below stated recommendations. Some concern was expressed on the selection and management decisions in relation to the investment policy.

## III. Recommendations

1. That the General Assembly strongly encourage all congregations and all denominational committees and agencies to participate in the retirement and insurance programs of the PCA on behalf of their ministers, staffs and lay employees.
Adopted

2. That the General Assembly strongly encourage all PCA presbyteries to require that retirement, health, life and disability insurance benefits be included in all pastoral calls.
Adopted

3. That the General Assembly strongly encourage all PCA churches to use calendar year budgeting for salaries and employee benefits.
Adopted

4. That the General Assembly strongly encourage all PCA congregations to support the annual Christmas Gift which funds retirement and ministerial relief activities.
Adopted

5. That the General Assembly continue to authorize the Board of Trustees to enhance the Plans and set premium rates for all insurance programs administered by the Trustees to become effective January 1 of each year. Premium rates each year will reflect the best judgement of the Trustees based on claims experience and all other appropriate factors. Rates will normally be changed no more often than once per year, except when necessary to maintain the viability of an insurance plan, and then no more often than once each six months.
Adopted

6. That all General Assembly Committee and Agency budgets be automatically adjusted to compensate for increases in health insurance premiums not anticipated in those budgets and that such increases be absorbed at no income loss to the individuals affected. Further, that PCA churches be encouraged to do the same.
Adopted

7. That the General Assembly remind its Nominating Committee that deacons may be elected to the Board and that Assembly rules do not require a specific balance of ruling and teaching elders, that “geographical balance” is not required, and that the primary consideration for election to the Board of Trustees of the Insurance, Annuity and Relief Funds should be qualification by background, training, and experience for the responsibilities assigned the Board.
Adopted

8. That the Minutes of the Board meetings of June 18, 1984, August 3-4, 1984, November 2-3, 1984, be approved without exception, and the minutes of March 1-2, 1985 be approved with notations.
Adopted

9. That the audit report dated December 31, 1984 by Kent, Nobles and Martin Certified Public Accountants, be received.
Adopted

10. That the 1986 budget be received with the understanding that this budget is a spending plan and that adjustments will be made during the year, if necessary, by the Trustees. Such adjustments will be reported to the next General Assembly.
Deferred to 13-73, III, 10, p. 136. See Appendix C, p. 201.

11. That the General Assembly approve the Board’s action in amending the Trustees’ Bylaws: Article II, Section 4 entitled, “Quorum” and Article IV, Section 1 entitled, “Standing Committees” (See Attachment A, Appendix G, p. 221).
Adopted

12. That the General Assembly amend Article IV, Section 10 of the Bylaws of the Presbyterian Church in America (a Corporation) to reflect the revised wording as shown on Attachment B, Appendix G, p. 222.
Adopted

13. That the Second Amendment to the Presbyterian Church in America Money Purchase Pension Plan (see Attachment C, Appendix G, p. 222ff) and the Third Amendment to the Presbyterian Church in America Voluntary Tax-Sheltered

Annuity Plan be adopted (see Attachment D, Appendix G, p. 225). Further, that the Resolutions relating thereto be adopted and included in the Minutes of the General Assembly (see Attachment E.1, Appendix G, p. 228). Adopted

14. That the First and Second Amendments to the Presbyterian Church in America Long-Term Disability Plan be approved (see Attachment E and Attachment E.05, Appendix G, p. 226). Further, that the Resolution relating thereto be adopted and included in the Minutes of the General Assembly (see Attachment E.1, Appendix G, p. 228). Adopted

15. That the General Assembly receive as information the excerpts from “The Church At Risk”, a research report by TE Robert G. Sweet (see Attachment F, Appendix G, p. 229) and further, that the Assembly take seriously the problem of burn-out among PCA ministers and through appropriate action attempt to prevent and treat this problem. Adopted

16. That the General Assembly approve the establishment of an IAR staff position of Coordinator of Ministerial Relief to work with the presbyteries to better facilitate ministerial relief activities at the local level and as a first step in addressing some of the concerns expressed in the Robert Sweet research report mentioned in recommendation 15 above, and that the IAR director be urged to coordinate his ministry with the staff of CE&amp;P. Adopted

17. That the General Assembly approve the decision of the Trustees that 100% of the benefits received from the Annuity Fund for Ministers and the RPCES Pension Fund Plan be considered as housing allowance for retired ordained participants, beginning January 1, 1985. Adopted

18. That the General Assembly approve the standardized Presbyterian Church in America Minister’s Compensation Worksheet plus accompanying explanations and authorize distribution to presbyteries and churches with the recommendation that churches be encouraged to use this material as a helpful resource (see Attachment G, Appendix G, p. 233). Adopted

19. That recognizing the past labors of Mr. Gordon Moore, with Insurance, Annuities, and Relief, the General Assembly extends to him our gratitude for his services and best wishes as he becomes Church Administrator of a particular church. Adopted

20. That appreciation be expressed to the Board of Trustees of Insurance, Annuities, and Relief for their diligent stewardship of God’s gifts in promoting the well-being of Christ’s Church in an excellent way. Adopted

21. That the report as a whole be adopted. Adopted

Respectfully submitted,

Bruce B. Howes, Chairman

Jack Carran, Secretary

Roll of Committee of Commissioners Present:

**Presbytery**

Ascension

Central Florida

Central Georgia

Covenant

Delmarva

Evangel

Mississippi Valley

Missouri

**Commissioner**

TE William R. Voorhis

RE Gary Vance

RE Robert G. DeLoach

TE George Coxhead

TE Bruce B. Howes, Chairman

RE George Moss

RE Jack Treloar

RE Jack Carran, Secretary

|  North Georgia | TE Charles DeBardeleben  |
| --- | --- |
|  North Texas | TE David Clelland  |
|  Northern Illinois | TE Douglas Tilley  |
|  Siouxlands | TE Timothy Diehl  |
|  Southeast Alabama | TE William H. Dever, Jr.  |
|  Southwest | TE James Urish  |
|  Warrior | RE Horace Hammett  |
|  Western Carolinas | TE John M. Warren  |
|  Westminster | TE John Otis  |

## 13-59 Special Presentation to Covenant Theological Seminary.

TE S. Michael Preg, Jr., Vice-Chairman of the Assembly Arrangements Committee, made a special presentation of a plaque to be attached to the pulpit used by the moderator at this Assembly, which pulpit had been borrowed from the chapel of Covenant Theological Seminary. The plaque noted the use of the pulpit by this Assembly. TE Paul D. Kooistra, president of the Seminary, received the plaque and responded to the presentation in behalf of the Seminary.

## 13-60 Mission to the World Program Presentation.

RE W. Jack Williamson, chairman of the Committee on Mission to the World, introduced the program and led in prayer. A film on the ministry of the World Relief Commission was shown. TE Donald B. Patterson, pastor-at-large for MTW, spoke of the Committee’s ministries and then introduced those missionaries present at the Assembly. The showing of the MTW video presentation, “The Voice of a Servant”, concluded the program and the Assembly recessed for lunch at 12:00 noon with prayer by Mr. Patterson.

MINUTES — THURSDAY AFTERNOON
June 20, 1985

Tenth Session

## 13-61 Reconvening.

The Assembly reconvened at 1:30 p.m. with the singing of “Christ Shall Have Dominion” and prayer led by TE Samuel S. Cappel.

## 13-62 Report of the Committee of Commissioners on Mission to the World.

Mr. Cappel, chairman of the Committee, presented the report.

### I. Business Referred to the Committee

A. Review of the Minutes of the Permanent Committee on Mission to the World dated August 10, 1984; November 16, 1984; February 15, 1985; and May 10, 1985.

B. Report of the Committee on Mission to the World to the Thirteenth General Assembly. (Appendix K, p. 275.)

C. Recommendation #16 approved by the Twelfth General Assembly (Minutes, p. 99) that the 1985 Committee of Commissioners review the 18 month audit done in connection with the change of fiscal year.

D. Overture #13 from the presbytery of Grace.

### II. Major Issues Discussed

A. All the matters of business referred (A, B, C, D above).

B. Communications between MTW and the presbytery MTW Committees.

## III. Recommendations

1. That the General Assembly express its gratitude to God for each missionary and candidate and ask His continued provision for their spiritual, physical, and emotional needs.
Adopted

2. That the General Assembly express its appreciation to the presbyteries, churches, and individuals who give prayerful and financial support to the missionary family and work of Mission to the World.
Adopted

3. That the General Assembly commend the work of Paul McKaughan and that he be reelected to the office of the Coordinator, through the next General Assembly.
Adopted

4. That the General Assembly express its appreciation to Administrative Director Carl Wilhelm, to Coordinator of Personnel Jayson Kyle, to Pastor-at-Large Donald B. Patterson, to Missionary/Evangelist Jimmy Lyons, to Associate SIMA Coordinator Dan Porter, and to the entire MTW staff for their exemplary service to our Lord in behalf of our denomination and its missionaries.
Adopted

5. That the General Assembly call our denomination to prayer to the “Lord of the Harvest to send forth laborers into His harvest,” and that the day of May 18, 1986, be observed as a day of prayer for world evangelization.
Adopted

6. That the General Assembly urge the churches to set aside a portion of their giving for the suffering peoples of the world and that, to that end, it be recommended that a special offering for world relief be taken on Easter Sunday of 1986.
Adopted

7. That the presbyteries and churches be urged to challenge their gifted men to serve the cause of Christ in world evangelization and particularly that this need be published for teaching elders to serve on Mission to the World church-planting teams and that each presbytery’s missions committee report annually on the progress of these concerns to their presbyteries.
Adopted

8. That the cooperative agreements with Africa Inland Mission, Language Institute for Evangelism, Ministries in Action, and Peninsular Presbytery in Mexico be approved. (See Appendix K, pp. 283ff)
Adopted

TEs Larry E. Ball, Kenneth L. Gentry, Jr., James A. Jones, Jr., Robert B. Needham, and Frank J. Smith requested that their negative votes be recorded.

9. That the proposed budgets for MTW and SIMA be approved in connection with the report of the Committee on Administration.

Deferred to 13-73, III, 14, 15, p. 137. See Appendix C, p. 195f

10. That the Thirteenth General Assembly adopt the following wording to be added to the paragraph approved by the Twelfth General Assembly as included in the paper “MTW 1993 — A Picture of Purpose” under Church Growth in the MTW Primary Purpose (Definition of Terms):

It is therefore our responsibility both to sow broadly and to reap the whitened fields He has brought to ripeness. There may be exceptions, but such church growth is the normal indicator by which we in Mission to the World will evaluate our effectiveness.

The paragraph under Church Growth would then read as follows:

## CHURCH GROWTH

Obedience to the Scriptures is the final test of our ministry. Such obedience will result in God’s blessing, which by the graciousness of our God may often be observed in qualitative and quantitative church growth. It is

therefore our responsibility both to sow broadly and to reap the whitened fields He has brought to ripeness. There may be exceptions, but such church growth is the normal indicator by which we in Mission to the World will evaluate our effectiveness.
Adopted
TEs Daniel C. Broadwater and Robert B. Needham requested that their negative votes be recorded.

11. That the Minutes of the Permanent Committee of August 10, 1984; November 16, 1984; February 15, 1985; and May 10, 1985 be approved with notations.
Adopted

12. That Overture 13 (p. 53) be answered by the adoption of the following resolution:

**Whereas** MTW does not regularly give individual contributors an exact distribution of the funds received for the support of missionaries or candidates (they do inform contributors of continuing financial needs of candidates); and

**Whereas** MTW makes available through their annual report to GA (and also by the Network and the Messenger) information regarding the use of funds for administrative or other expense categories; and

**Whereas**, all undesignated giving goes toward administrative expenses and that all giving information may be received upon request; and

**Whereas**, a sub-committee of the MTW Permanent Committee is currently studying the communication of financial information;

**Therefore**, we recommend that MTW not be required to provide quarterly reports to all churches on how the monies have been distributed and that MTW communicate with the Presbytery of Grace and First Presbyterian Church of Biloxi to clear up any questions about administrative costs or disbursements of funds.
Adopted
TE Jack Williamson reported on the cost of the MTW audio-visual presentation: 10 sets, was $9,800, which, when divided by 139 churches viewing the presentation, works out to $70 per church.

13. That we encourage our churches to intercede regularly in prayer for our missionaries and our fellow-believers in various parts of the world who, for the sake of the Gospel, suffer under persecution and threat of oppression.
Adopted

14. That the report as a whole be adopted, pending adoption of the budget.
Adopted

Respectfully submitted,
Samuel S. Cappel, Chairman
Walter Shepard, Secretary

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
