# 8 — TE Eric Dye et al. v. Missouri Presbytery

**Court:** Committee on Judicial Business (CJB)  ·  **Assembly:** 14th (1986)  ·  **Disposition:** Specs 1, 2, 4, and 6 sustained. Trial annulled and remanded to Missouri Presbytery for new trial with specific procedural requirements  ·  **Dissent:** yes

*Source: [ga14_1986 pp. 214–221](../markdown/ga14_1986.md#ga14-p214)*

---

## Case #8: Complaint of TE Eric Dye et al. against Missouri Presbytery

The undersigned elders of Missouri Presbytery complain against the following actions of Missouri Presbytery and its officers and defense lawyers in connection with the case of the Rev. George Stulac and do so in terms of the specific complaints listed below:

Complaint #1. The action of the moderator in ruling a motion to dismiss the charge to be in order before the mandated judicial procedure had been completed and of the court in sustaining such a ruling (this action took place before the defense witnesses had been examined and cross-examined, and before the arguments of the prosecutor, the accused and the response of the prosecutor had even been heard; this action took place on Saturday, September 21, 1985, see the typed transcript of the trial, the remarks of the moderator and prosecution [inaccurately labeled defense] on page 98, the question put and voted on pages 99-100, the remarks of the prosecution on page 96, in the context of pages 95-100, and also refer to the remarks of the defense on page 7).

a. BCO 32-15 mandates that "the following order shall be observed,"

b. The advice of the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly given after consultation with the Chairman of the Judicial Committee, and previously requested by the Prosecutor in anticipation of this motion which had been previously indicated as contemplated by the Defense lawyers, was read to the court (see attached),

c. The principles of BCO 42-3 were brought to the attention of the court which indicate the grounds for an appeal (and presumably also for a complaint) such as, "any irregularity in the proceedings of the lower court; ...declining to receive proper evidence; hurrying to a decision before all testimony is taken,; manifestation of prejudice in the case; and mistake or injustice in the judgment...,"

d. The court found it in order to vote on the charge even though the witnesses for the defense had not been examined or cross-examined, the prosecutor had not been heard, the accused had not been heard, and the closing presentation of the prosecutor had not been heard, and furthermore the mandated order is that the vote shall be taken after these items have occurred and the members may express their opinion (BCO 32-15).

<!-- PAGE ga=14 pdf_page=215 printed_page=null -->

Complaint #2. The action of the court in dismissing the charge “with respect to statements involving (1) doctrinal deviation and (2) harmful vacillation concerning the continuation of the (revelatory) gift of prophecy, which are contrary to the Word of God...” (this action took place by motion on Saturday, September 21, 1985; see pages 106 and 107, the remarks of the moderator and the actual vote, in the context of pages 95-107 of the transcription).

a. The court acted procedurally contrary to the provisions of the Book of Church Order as indicated by the aforementioned items listed under our first complaint,

b. The court dismissed a charge which it had accepted from the Ad Hoc Committee on the basis of which, and without exception or alteration, it had entered into judicial process (see the minutes of this meeting),

c. The accused acknowledged in his defense paper that this charge represented his position, namely, that the gift of prophecy continued (see the defense paper of the accused, the last two paragraphs on the bottom on page 3 and the third paragraph from the bottom of page 4 of the section on “Prophecy” of “Responses to Missouri Presbytery’s Ad Hoc Committee Report...July, 1985”),

d. The accused neither denied the reality or truthfulness of the charge nor indicated any change with regard to his position, and yet the court dismissed the charge,

e. The court gave no ground or basis for its action in the motion it adopted so that there is no stated reason for such an action,

f. The mover of the motion (please refer to the transcription record at this point, Saturday, September 21, 1985, namely, the remarks of Mr. Akin on pages 95, 96) appealed to BCO 34-5 as a grounds for dismissing charge. In heeding the motion of the mover and the grounds he cited, the court determined that if a charge is not heresy or schism which would warrant deposition, or if it did not strike at the vitals of religion and was not industriously spread, it should not be adjudicated at all. This is contrary to the Book of Church Order’s own determination of what is “an offense, the proper object of judicial process,” namely, “anything in the doctrine or practice of a church member professing faith in Christ which is contrary to the Word of God” (BCO 29-1) and which may not be heresy or schism, etc., and which may receive a lesser censure than deposition (BCO 30). The court substituted its evaluation of the seriousness of the offense and how it should be evaluated and censured for the question before the court, namely, whether it was an offense contrary to the Word of God. The court thereby failed to carry out its prescribed duty according to BCO 29-1.

Complaint #3. The accusatory line of questioning by the defense ruled in order by the moderator several times and sustained at least once by the court when the witnesses were those members of the Session of Memorial Church who had expressed concern to the Presbytery about the matters under adjudication (see the proceedings of Friday night, September 20, 1985, and questionings, responses and objections on pages 43, 44, 50, 51, 53, 54, 57, 58, and pages 60 through 67 of the transcription).

a. BCO 31-3 indicates that “the original and only parties in a case of process are the accuser and the accused.” It goes on to indicate that the accuser

<!-- PAGE ga=14 pdf_page=216 printed_page=null -->

“is always the Presbyterian Church in America” and says further that “the prosecutor...is always the representative of the Church and as such has all its rights in the case.” *BCO* 32-19 allows the accused to be represented by any member of the court. When representing the accused he acts for and in the name of the accused. *BCO* 31-11 says explicitly that “in the discussion of all questions arising in his own case, the accused shall exercise the rights of defendant, not of judge.” Therefore, whether the accused or the one representing him questions witnesses, those questions must only bear upon whether or not the accused is innocent, not upon some other guilt that he wants to bring before the court by means of his question and by means of which he is acting in the role “of judge.”

b. *BCO* 35-5 says explicitly that “the court shall not permit questions frivolous or irrelevant to the charge at issue.” *BCO* 32-13 says that “any questions asked must be pertinent to the issue.” The particular charge before the court had to do with the accused’s belief or doctrine concerning the gift of prophecy. No insinuation of wrong on the part of the defense in its questioning of a witness proves the innocence of the accused and his belief because his belief does not depend upon the supposed guilt of a witness. But such line of questioning does seek to redirect (and even misdirect) the focus of the court from the charge itself. Furthermore, it seeks to evoke sympathy for the accused so that the court is prejudiced for the accused. This prejudicing of the court seeks to bring the court to vote on the basis of feeling and emotions rather than on the question of guilt or innocence in terms of the charge itself. Such irrelevant, non-pertinent, and accusatory questions are ruled out by the *BCO* because they have the potential of producing a miscarriage of justice.

Complaint #4. The ruling of the moderator and the decision by the court to uphold the moderator which required a witness to answer only in the categories and with the terms prescribed by the moderator (Friday and Saturday, September 20, 21, 1985, see the comments of the moderator on the bottom of page 57, the interchange on the top of page 58, the remarks of the moderator on page 61, the remarks of the moderator, the actual vote, the remarks of the defense and of Mr. Robertson on page 62);

a. Although it is true that the *BCO* 35-5 indicates that “no question shall be put or answered except by permission of the Moderator, subject to the appeal of the court,” this proviso itself is given in the light of the teaching of Scripture and the provisions of the constitutional standards of the Presbyterian Church in America. Nowhere does the *Book of Church Order* give to the moderator or the court the absolute right to set the categories and terms by which a witness must answer. Contrariwise, the Westminster Confession of Faith, XX, ii says that “God alone is the Lord of the conscience, and hath left it free from the doctrines and commandments of men, which are, in any thing, contrary to His Word; ... So that...to obey such commands, out of conscience, is to betray true liberty of conscience, and the requiring of...an absolute and blind obedience, is to destroy liberty of conscience, and reason also.”

The undersigned complain against the Presbytery in terms of the above complaints and consider the complaints of such importance and their substance as such evidence against a fair and impartial hearing and adjudication of the case that they also complain,

<!-- PAGE ga=14 pdf_page=217 printed_page=null -->

as Complaint #5, against the adjudication of the case by the Presbytery and do thereby urge that it be heard and adjudicated by the General Assembly without being remanded again to the Presbytery.

|  Eric Dye | Oscar Koirtyohann  |
| --- | --- |
|  George Knight | William Linton  |
|  William Dare | Donald McCoy  |
|  George Devlin | James Routszong  |
|  Barry Gillette | Steve Skees  |
|  John Hill | Morton Whitman  |
|   | David Winecoff  |

The undersigned elders of Missouri Presbytery add to the five complaints submitted on September 27, 1985, the following complaint against the action of Missouri Presbytery in connection with the case of the Rev. George Stulac:

Complaint #6. The ruling of the moderator and the action of the presbytery in upholding the ruling that disallowed the vote and suspension provision of BCO 43-4 to any and all the complaints before the presbytery (BCO 43-4 states: "Notice of complaint shall not have the effect of suspending the action against which the complaint is made, unless one-third of the members present when the action was taken shall vote for its suspension, until the final decision in the higher court;" the action hereby complained against was the first ruling and vote on Friday September 27, 1985, see the request for a vote on pages 150 and 151, the ruling by the moderator denying the request on page 151, which ruling was sustained by the presbytery on pages 154, 155, in the context of pages 146-155 of the transcript);

a. BCO 43-1 states that "a complaint is written representation made against some act or decision of a court of the Church. It is the right...to make complaint against any action of a court to whose jurisdiction he is subject ..." The proviso of the Book of Church Order allows a complaint against "some act or decision," indeed against "any action." The complaints were clearly therefore in order.

b. BCO 43-4 makes specific provision for a large minority of the court, i.e., "one-third of the members present when the action was taken" to vote for the suspension of that action, "against which the complaint is made," and the action is to be suspended "until the final decision in the higher court." BCO 43-4 provides for this vote and suspension with reference to any complaint that is made. And BCO 43-1 has indicated that a complaint can be brought against "any action of the court."

c. The ruling of the moderator and the action of the court in upholding the ruling was to disallow that vote to be taken on any or all the complaints filed in written form and also to disallow the possibility of any suspension of any action of the court even if one-third of the members present desired to vote for a suspension of the action. If ever rights of a large minority, i.e., one-third of the members present, had a right to be exercised being made in a judicial case. But they were denied.

d. On several of the actions against which complaints were filed, e.g., complaints #1 and #2, the roll call vote showed a vote of 28 for and 17 against with the moderator abstaining. The total vote was then 45 or 46. The number 17, being more than one-third of the members present

<!-- PAGE ga=14 pdf_page=218 printed_page=null -->

when the action was taken, gave warrant for the complainants to ask for a one-third vote to suspend the action.

e. The vote of the court on the ruling of the moderator to disallow the votes of the one-third minority and thus the disallowance of the application of the provisions of *BCO 43-4* was itself a vote of 32 for and 19 against the ruling of the moderator. Here again, one-third of the court was opposed to this action and should have been permitted to have the provision of *BCO 43-4* apply to this vote also. But since the presbytery was then and there disallowing the one-third vote provision of *BCO 43-4*, it seemed hopeless to ask for its application against that action itself.

The complainants are frustrated and dismayed at what they consider to be failures to follow the agreed upon procedures of the *Book of Church Order* and finally even the denial of rights of a sizeable minority, namely, one-third of the members present, to exercise its right of voting and of thereby suspending the action of the court until the final decision on the matter is given in the higher court.

The complainants believe that these items have merit in their own right for the ongoing issues of fairness, order, and compliance with the agreed upon procedure of the *Book of Church Order* and ask that they be addressed and dealt with regardless of how the charges in the trial have been or may be regarded or adjudicated.

**Signatures:**

|  Eric Dye | William Linton  |
| --- | --- |
|  George Knight | Walter Lorenz  |
|  William Dare | Donald McCoy  |
|  George Devlin | James Routszong  |
|  Barry Gillette | Wilbur Siddons  |
|  John Hill | Steve Skees  |
|  Oscar Koirtyohann | Dwayne TerMaat  |
|  Robert Korljan | Morton Whitman  |
|   | David Winecoff  |

**Attachment**

September 16, 1985

To: Dr. George Knight III
From: The Stated Clerk of the General Assembly
Subject: Opinion Regarding the Force of *BCO 32-15*

This is in response to your request for an opinion regarding whether it would be proper during a trial for a motion to dismiss a part of the indictment, that has been previously drawn.

First, let me indicate in writing as I did orally, the Stated Clerk does not give official interpretations of the *Book of Church Order*. If such is required, the Judicial Business Committee of the General Assembly is authorized to give official interpretations, which are binding until the next meeting of the General Assembly. The Assembly either endorses or rejects the opinions of the Committee. Official opinions may be requested only by a court of the Church, not by an individual. If your Presbytery or a Session desires an official interpretation, they may request it in writing from the Judicial Business Committee. The Committee may addressed in care of the Rev. Rodney King, Chairman, 8300 N. LaCanada, Tucson, Arizona 85704.

<!-- PAGE ga=14 pdf_page=219 printed_page=null -->

At your request, I will give you my personal opinion on the subject. I took time to check this with Mr. King. We are both agreed that there is no provision in the BCO for the dismissal of parts of the indictment. BCO 32-15 gives the prescribed way in which a trial is to be conducted. It says, "the following order shall be observed ..." We are both of the opinion that this is mandatory. A motion to dismiss a portion of the indictment in the midst of the trial would serve to interrupt the prescribed order, without a full hearing of the case as set forth in BCO 32-15.

If the Presbytery should allow such a motion for dismissal, it is conceivable that it would become grounds for complaint to General Assembly against the presbytery for not following the Book of Church Order, especially if the result of such a motion was to remove parts of the indictment from the trial, without sufficient hearing by the Presbytery.

I trust that this may be of help to you and the defense in your handling of the judicial case that is before the Presbytery.

Copy to: Rev. Ronald Lutjens
Mr. Mark Belz
Rev. Egon Middelmann
Rev. David Winecoff

*— — —*

## ADJUDICATION OF JUDICIAL COMMISSION #8

### I. Statement of the Facts

1. The Missouri Presbytery received the report of its Ad Hoc Committee, including charges against TE George Stulac, at a called meeting on May 25, 1985, and appointed a prosecutor so that an indictment could be drawn.
2. The Presbytery conducted a trial on September 20, 21, 27, 1985.
3. In the trial, following the testimony of witnesses for the prosecution, a motion was made to withdraw charge #1. A point of order was raised by the prosecution that the motion was out of order on the basis of BCO 32-15.
4. The chair ruled the motion out of order. The ruling of the chair was appealed to the body, which sustained the ruling of the chair.
5. There was an amendment to motion to withdrawn the charge which allowed the prosecution to make closing arguments.
6. After the closing arguments, a vote was taken on a motion to withdraw charge #1, and the motion carried.
7. A complaint was filed in writing concerning alleged irregularities in the trial.
8. A request was made to suspend the court's action on the basis of BCO 43-4. The moderator ruled the motion to suspend out of order, the ruling was appealed, and the ruling of the chair was sustained.
9. Subsequently, the remaining charges were withdrawn.
10. The complaints were acted on and denied by Missouri Presbytery at a stated meeting on April 18-19, 1986, and were forwarded to the Stated Clerk GA on April 29, 1986.

### II. The Statement of the Issues

1. "The action of the Moderator in ruling a motion to dismiss the charge to be in order before the mandated judicial procedure had been completed, and of the court in sustaining such a ruling."
2. "The action of the court in dismissing the charge with respect to statements

<!-- PAGE ga=14 pdf_page=220 printed_page=null -->

involving (1) doctrinal deviation and (2) harmful vacillation concerning the continuation of the (revelatory) gift of prophecy, which are contrary to the Word of God...

3. "The accusatory line of questioning by the defense ruled in order by the moderator several times and sustained at least once by the court when the witnesses were those members of the Session of Memorial Church who had expressed concern to the presbytery about the matters under adjudication."

4. "The ruling of the moderator, and the decision by the court to uphold the moderator, which required a witness to answer only in the categories and with the terms prescribed by the moderator."

5. "The adjudication of the case by the Presbytery, and the request that it be heard and adjudicated by the General Assembly without being remanded again to the Presbytery."

6. "The ruling of the moderator, and the action of the presbytery in upholding the ruling that disallowed the vote and suspension provision of BCO 43-4 to any and all the complaints before the presbytery."

## III. Judgment of the Case and Amends

### A. The Judgment of the Case

1. The first specification is sustained on grounds that BCO 32-15 mandates an order for trial once charges have been received, but the trial did not proceed to verdict. We find no evidence in BCO that a trial process may be suspended without coming to verdict.

2. The second specification is sustained on grounds that BCO 32-15 mandates an order for trial once charges have been received, but the trial did not proceed to verdict. We find no evidence in BCO that a trial process may be suspended without coming to verdict.

3. The third specification is not sustained on grounds that the question of the credibility of the witness was raised by the witness and the prosecution by the defense (BCO 35-1);

Further, that the prosecution failed to object to the alleged "accusatory" line of questioning of the witness on the first day of trial, and then in re-direct examination the next day, the prosecution went fully into the event about which the complainants claim the defense had no right to go (BCO 35-5).

4. The fourth specification is sustained on grounds that the moderator exceeded his authority as provided in BCO 35-5 by stipulating in what terms the witness must respond to a question. We do not understand BCO 35-12 to require a witness to answer a question in terms prescribed by the moderator.

5. The fifth specification is not sustained on grounds that it does not specify an error, but rather asks for Amends.

6. The sixth specification is sustained on grounds that BCO 43-4 is designed to protect a substantial minority from irretrievable action by the court, but the moderator made an improper application of BCO 43-4 and thereby failed to protect the interests of the minority in a ruling based on an improper distinction between different actions of the presbytery (BCO 43-1); further, that the Presbytery sustained the ruling of the moderator.

### B. The Amends

The Commission annuls the trial (the Presbyterian Church in America vs. TE George Stulac) and remands the case to Missouri Presbytery.

<!-- PAGE ga=14 pdf_page=221 printed_page=null -->

## IV. Advice

The Commission advises Missouri Presbytery that it might respond to this order in one of the following three ways:

1. The Presbytery may conduct a trial as recommended by its Ad Hoc Committee. Should the Presbytery follow this course of action, the commission recommends that the Presbytery (a) seek to elect a new moderator who will be acceptable to all parties; (b) appoint new prosecutor(s); (c) follow carefully all the required procedures of BCO; or
2. The Presbytery may request the General Assembly to assume original jurisdiction in the case if there is appeal to BCO 44-3; or
3. The Presbytery may consider having a called meeting for the purpose of amending or rescinding its action of May 25, 1985, in receiving the report of the Ad Hoc Committee which presented the charges. Should the Presbytery follow this course of action, it is advised to follow carefully the required rules of parliamentary procedure and the BCO. Adopted

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
