# Case p340 — Southern Florida Presbytery; TE Phil Maddux

**Court:** CJB  ·  **Assembly:** 15th (1987)  ·  **Disposition:** administrative  ·  **BCO cited:**  32-2 32-3 15-3 30-3 38-1 

*Source: [ga15_1987 pp. 340–341](../markdown/ga15_1987.md)*

---

(3), where it is stated that only "basic" knowledge of Biblical doctrine and church government
is required.
By way of contrast, BCO 21-4 specifically states that trials for ordination shall consist of
a "careful" examination in all parts.
However, it is also true that BCO 21-4 allows a Presbytery to accept all or any parts of
the licensure examination as satisfying the corresponding parts of the ordination examination,
if it is satisfied that the examination given at the licensure level meets the requirement of a
"careful examination." the determination of what constitutes "basic” knowledge and what
constitutes a "careful examination" is one which must be left to Presbytery to decide in each
case, subject to review and control or judicial process.
It is clear, therefore, that a higher standard is required for the ordination, examination
than for the licensure examination and Presbyteries are expected to ensure that this distinction
is maintained. No changes in the BCO are required.”
17. That the Assembly adopt the following
"The BCO provides for two methods of fencing the Lord’s Table (BCO 58-4).
the first methodist hat of close communion, wherein the Session examines each person
seeking admission to the table. By following this procedure, the Session assumes exclusive
responsibility for admission to, or exclusion from, the table.
The second method is that wherein those present are invited who ‘profess the true
religion and are communicants in good standing in any evangelical church’. The term
’evangelical’ historically refers to that view of salvation which asserts that god communicates
saving grace directly to the individual. this is in contrast to sacerdotalism, which asserts that
grace is communicated through persons and the sacraments. The term ‘evangelical’, used in
this historic sense, is virtually identical to the term ‘protestant’. For further elaboration of this
distinction, we commend the study of the plan of salvation by B.B. Warfield.
By the second method, responsibility is shared (1) by the Session and the minister who
must instruct those present as to the guidelines for admission to the table, and (2) by each
individual who must examine himself to determine if he conforms to these guidelines. In the
absence of evidence to the contrary, the session exercises a judgment of charity in accepting
the individual’s self-evaluation as to whether he professes true religion and is a communicant
in good standing in an evangelical church. Once the minister has given the invitation (together
with appropriate Biblical instruction), the principal responsibility for determining whether the
individual meets the guidelines rests with his own understanding and conscience.”
18. That the Rules for Assembly Operations be amended in the following way:
1) Add a new 5-10: "All communications or overtures which propose or request that the
General Assembly appoint a study committee for any purpose shall contain as part of the
request or proposal a statement of the maximum amount to be budgeted for the study
committee."
2) Add a new 8-6 (9): "Where a study committee is proposed in any communication or
overture, a statement of the maximum amount to be budgeted for the study committee."
19. That the BCO in the following way:
1) BCO 22-3 shall read:
"An assistant pastor is called by the Session, by the permission and approval of
Presbytery, under the provisions of chapter 20,21 and 13-2, with presbytery membership
being governed by the same provisions that apply to pastors. He is not a member of the
Session, but may be appointed on special occasions to moderated the Session under the
provisions of 12-4.
2) BCO 22-4 shall read:
"The relationship of the Associate pastor to the church is determined by the
congregation. The relationship of the assistant pastor to the church is determined by the
Session. The dissolution of the relationship of both is governed by the provision of
Chapter 23."
20. Regarding Southern Florida Presbytery and the case of RE Maddux.
REPORT
The 14th General Assembly referred "the matter of the Judicial Commission of Southern
Florida Presbytery regarding RE Maddux" for proper investigation on recommendation of the
Committee on Review and Control.
The Maddux case covered a period from September 1983 to April, 1987-alm ost four
years. It reveals serious failures by Southern Florida Presbytery, by its Judicial Commission

and by a Session within its bounds, in dealing with divorce, suspension from office and
excommunication.
On April 20,1987, Presbytery rescinded its previous action acknowledged it had erred,
thus agreeing with the view that the divorce was properly executed on the basis of i Cor. 7:15
given the circumstances of the case at the time of the divorce. It also lifted the suspension in
force against Mr. Maddux.
Even though the last actions Presbytery on the Maddux case renders moot any further
action on the case by the General Assembly, the Committee on Judicial Business feels
compelled to report some specific failures for the edification of all our presbyteries and
sessions.
Some of the major failures are:
1. On April 16,1985, Presbytery failed to grant explicit judicial powers for the commission.
This was exascerbated since no specific charges had been made and written out (cf.
BCO 32-2 and 3).
2. There are no minutes or records of the trial of TE Phil Maddux by the Judicial
Commission on June 3,1985 (officially called for in a letter dated May 22,1985).
3. In a letter to the congregation (dated June 11, 1985), the pastor, who also served on the
Judicial Commission (contra BCO 15-3) made an "informal statement" on the trial as
authorized by the Commission. No "formal statement" was made until Aug. 26, 1985.
The decision was not reported to Presbytery until the October meeting. Such delay for a
formal decision was irresponsible and irregular. Authorizing a member to make an
"informal statement" was very unwise and injudicious before a formal decision was
written and raufied by Presbytery. The Commission had a responsibility to complete its
ac don sand write its decisions for the sake of Mr. Maddux and the congregation, and for
expedidous action by Presbytery.
4. The July 16, 1985, meedng of Presbytery confused the reports of two Judicial
Commissions of Presbytery, without identifying the one referred to us in item 17 (page
11). If that item referred to the Maddux case, it was defeated, in essence reversing the
action regarding Mr. Maddux. If not, then only item 18 (page 12) is of significance, but
only that Grace Church Judicial Commission was "still active."
5. The minutes of the presbytery (Oct. 5, 1985) shows that Judicial Commission "asked to
depose Mr. Maddux from office . . . and suspend him from the Sacraments" but fails to
record any action taken. No report of the Commission is spread in the minutes, only an
attachment, i.e. the decision written on August 26,1985.
6. With the exception of one meeting, the Judicial Commission failed to keep minutes of
their meetings and actions. Some notes of the Oct. 21,1986, meeting of the commission
were scribbled on the margins of the Oct. 21, 1986, agenda of southern florida
Presbytery. Other actions were incorporated as part of the Session minutes.
Two additional observations must be made:
7. In a letter (Sept. 8, 1985) Mr. Maddux wrote the Judicial Commission expressing his
regret and repentance even though he felt the Commission did not have "all or the true
facts" for their decision. He added that he was "financially unable" to appeal and gives
four reasons he would have offered in such an appeal. The Commission and Presbytery
failed to advise him of his due rights, and that finances should not have been a factor.
8. Judicial Commissions ought to meet in a place and manner appropriate to the solemnity
of their task. From notes and communications, it was evident that the Judicial
Commission met and acted in a manner inconsistent with this principle.
Specific Recommendations:
1. In light of the restoration by Southern Florida Presbytery of Mr. Maddux on April 20,
1987, no further action is called for in this case.
2. We would remind all presbyteries of the PCA, in the light of this case, that full and
correct records of Judicial cases are necessary to protect the rights and interest of all
parties involved.
That this report be adopted.
21. That the advice of the Committee on Judicial Business regarding Constitutional Inquiry #8 be
ratified (see I.D.8. above).
22. That Overture 4 from the Presbytery of Westminster be found in order and referred to the
committee of commissioners on judicial Business.

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
