# 5 — TE Robert G. Rayburn et al. v. Missouri Presbytery

**Court:** Committee on Judicial Business (CJB)  ·  **Assembly:** 16th (1988)  ·  **Disposition:** complaint not sustained; decision of lower court confirmed by vote of 7-4  ·  **Dissent:** yes

*Source: [ga16_1988 pp. 215–222](../markdown/ga16_1988.md#ga16-p215)*

---

## 16-97 Commission to Adjudicate Case #5.

TE Craig Childs, chairman, led in prayer and presented the report. The sergeants-at-arms were instructed to call all commissioners to the floor. On motion the report was adopted by vote of 238 affirmative, 191 negative. (See 16-45, p. 130, for quorum set.)

## Case #5: TE Robert G. Rayburn et al. vs. Missouri Presbytery

The undersigned elders of Missouri Presbytery complain against the following action of Missouri Presbytery adopted on Saturday, April 16, 1988:

That Presbytery instruct the Candidates and Credentials Committee to examine candidates, with the following understanding:

While the Missouri Presbytery, by action on March 5, 1988, has adopted the view that certain gifts of the Spirit have ceased, and consequently now has the right to judge the minority view to be an exception to our doctrinal standards (the minority view being that the spiritual gifts of prophesy and tongues might be sovereignly given by God), nevertheless, this minority view should not, by itself, be judged as being out of accord with the fundamentals of our system of doctrine as long as those holding it commit themselves to the following:

1. The gifts do not communicate binding, special revelation, and any claiming the gifts shall not be allowed to demand other believers' submission to their claims.
2. Not only is the canon of Scripture closed, but no gift is to be allowed which has the practical effect of functioning as a normative source of truth or divine instruction from God, alongside the voice of the Holy Spirit speaking in the Scriptures.

<!-- PAGE ga=16 pdf_page=216 printed_page=null -->

3. Any view which holds that one in the present day can inerrantly predict the future is not allowed.

4. The Candidates and Credentials Committee has the right to instruct candidates not to teach on this subject until the General Assembly takes a position.

The undersigned elders offer as grounds for this complaint the fact that said motion with all its qualifications states that one who holds such a position should not thereby be disqualified as a candidate for the ministry of the Presbyterian Church in America in contradiction to the fact that the Judicial Decision adopted by the 1986 General Assembly (Gentry versus Calvary Presbytery, *Minutes* pages 224-233, see the statement in its entirety including its response to the dissent) indicated that one could not hold such a position and be received as minister in the Presbyterian Church in America because such a position is contrary to the Scriptures and to the Constitutional Standards of the Church, namely the *Westminster Confession of Faith* I:1 &amp; 6 and the *Book of Church Order 7-1* and is therefore "fundamentally out of accord with the doctrine of the Presbyterian Church in America" (page 229)

The signatories are:
TE Robert G. Rayburn
TE George W. Knight, III
TE Rodney D. Storz
TE Robert L. Reymond
TE Michael E. Osborne
RE Charles A. Lawrence
RE Andrew J. Larson
RE Joseph H. Hall
RE Gordon D. Shaw
RE Louis E. Shuler
RE Paul R. Jaeggi
RE Randall W. Stone
TE Robert E. Bell
RE George E. Devlin
RE Roland J. Van Heest
TE David K. Winecoff

## ADJUDICATION OF CASE #5

### I. Statement of the Facts

The pertinent facts which are not disputed are as follows:

1. On 5 March 1988, the Missouri Presbytery adopted the following motion: "A motion was adopted that this Presbytery recognizes that the Scriptures and the Westminster Confession of Faith clearly teach that those special gifts of the Holy Spirit which necessarily involved direct revelation from God, namely, gifts of apostles, prophets, tongues speakers, and interpreters of tongues have ceased, nevertheless we affirm the ongoing, sovereign, supernatural, ministries of the Holy Spirit in many gifts of Scriptural illumination."

2. On 16 April 1988, the Missouri Presbytery adopted the following motion: "That Presbytery instruct the Candidates and Credentials Committee to examine candidates, with the following understanding:

While the Missouri Presbytery, by action on March 5, 1988, has adopted the view that certain gifts of the Spirit have ceased, and consequently

<!-- PAGE ga=16 pdf_page=217 printed_page=null -->

now has the right to judge the minority view to be an exception to our doctrinal standards (the minority view being that the spiritual gifts of prophesy and tongues might be sovereignly given by God), nevertheless, this minority view should not, by itself, be judged as being out of accord with the fundamentals of our system of doctrine as long as those holding it commit themselves to the following:

1. The gifts do not communicate binding, special revelation, and any claiming of gifts shall not be allowed to demand other believer's submission to their claims.
2. Not only is the canon of Scripture closed, but no gift is to be allowed which has the practical effect of functioning as a normative source of truth or divine instruction from God, alongside the voice of the Holy Spirit speaking in the Scriptures.
3. Any view which holds that one in the present day can inerrantly predict the future is not allowed.
4. The Candidates and Credentials Committee has the right to instruct candidates not to teach on this subject until the General Assembly takes a position.

3. Complainants complained that this 16 April 1988 action of the Missouri Presbytery was fundamentally out of accord with the doctrine of the PCA.
4. The Complainants complaint was heard by Missouri Presbytery and denied on 29 April 1988.
5. Missouri Presbytery has wrestled with this issue for an extended period of time without satisfactory resolution as evidenced by their unanimous support for what is now Overture #25 before the 16th General Assembly.

## II. Statement of the Issue

The major issue in this dispute is as follows: Should one who holds a position such as is described as the "minority view" with its four qualifications as set forth in the April 16, 1988 motion of the Missouri Presbytery be disqualified as a candidate for the ministry in the PCA?

## III. Judgement of the Case

In balloting according to BCO 43, the Commission voted as follows:

To sustain the complaint: 4

Not to sustain the complaint: 7

In balloting according to GA RAO X.A. (15), the Commission voted as follows:

To confirm the decision of the lower court: 7

Not to confirm the decision of the lower court: 4

## IV. Explanatory Statement

1. Whereas the PCA is a "grass-roots" church, and
2. Whereas the two previous judgements (1980 Case #5, Bogue et al. vs. the Presbytery of Ascension and 1986 Case #1 Gentry et al. vs Calvary Presbytery) in similar cases have annulled the actions of the lower courts, and
3. Whereas another similar decision will not contribute to the resolution of the recurring problem, and
4. Whereas this has grown out of significant inconclusive Biblical and theological debate, and
5. Whereas existing PCA documents (e.g. the first paragraph of Chapter 5 of the RPCES F.O.G.) indicate other possibly allowable interpretations of the Constitution, and
6. Whereas the present case does not involve a specific individual, and

<!-- PAGE ga=16 pdf_page=218 printed_page=null -->

7. Whereas the action of the lower court has put in place extensive safeguards, and
8. Whereas the complainant and Respondent both desire "grass-roots" resolution of this issue, and
9. Whereas the lower court is striving to be submissive to the Constitution, and
10. Whereas we believe justice is the highest mandate of this commission,

WE therefore have not sustained the complaint and with fervent prayer desire that "grass-roots" resolution can be accomplished swiftly while the peace and purity of the church are maintained. To this end we encourage the 16th General Assembly to act favorably on Overture 25 from Missouri Presbytery.

## V. Commendation

The Commission commends the amiable and Christlike spirit shown by both the complainants and respondents throughout the presentation of the case.

|  Members of the Commission | Commissioner  |
| --- | --- |
|  **Presbytery** |   |
|  Calvary | TE Daniel Smyth  |
|  Central Carolina | TE James Braden  |
|  Covenant | TE Timothy Starnes  |
|  Delmarva | TE Larry Wanaselja, Alternate  |
|  Evangel | TE Craig Childs, Vice Chairman  |
|  Mid America | TE Patrick Cook  |
|  Mississippi Valley | RE Guerrant Smathers  |
|  New River | RE Harry Gardner  |
|  Northeast | RE Jack Merry, Alternate  |
|  North Texas | TE David Clelland  |
|  Pacific | TE Allen Mawhinney, Chairman  |
|  Palmetto | RE William Reid  |
|  Philadelphia | RE Kenneth Rush, Secretary  |
|  Southeast Alabama | RE Durwood Judah, Alternate  |
|  Southern Florida | RE James Stewart  |
|  Tennessee Valley | RE C. Robson, Jr.  |
|  West Carolina | RE William Dillingham  |
|  Westminster | RE Delbert Nichols  |

## Dissent of Minority of the Commission

1. The undersigned dissent from the majority opinion of this Commission on the grounds that the respondents view with its four qualifications as set forth in the April 16, 1988 motion of the Missouri Presbytery is fundamentally out of accord with the doctrine of the Presbyterian Church in America.

We find two earlier decisions of the General Assembly (1980, Bogue et al. vs. Presbytery of Ascension; 1986, Gentry et al. vs Calvary Presbytery) as having already expressed the view of the denomination:

"The Constitutional Standards of the PCA do not allow for a type of continuing revelation that is not canonical Scripture (which is complete) but is more than mere illumination and providence; a type of non-authoritative, non-canonical, new revelation."

(1986, Gentry et al. vs. Calvary Presbytery)

2. The undersigned are also concerned for the purity and peace of the church and the fulfillment of the Great Commission. Toward that end we fervently pray that

<!-- PAGE ga=16 pdf_page=219 printed_page=null -->

brothers in the Missouri Presbytery will be reconciled and walk in mutual love and confidence.

3. The undersigned further believe that Overture 25 (Submitted as evidence in this case) has been answered by previous General Assembly considerations on this issue.

Respectfully submitted,

RE Delbert Nichols, Westminster Presbytery

RE C. Douglas Robson, Jr., TN Valley Presbytery

RE Kenneth W. Rush, Philadelphia Presbytery

TE Daniel R. Smyth, Calvary Presbytery

# MINUTES OF JUDICIAL COMMISSION #5

The Judicial Commission to Adjudicate Case #5 convened at 10:30 a.m. on Tuesday, June 7, 1988 in room #6 of the Knoxville Convention Center. TE Allen Mawhinney, Convener, called the meeting to order with a season of prayer.

A quorum of Commissions was present:

|  Calvary | TE Daniel Smyth  |
| --- | --- |
|  Central Carolina | TE James Braden  |
|  Covenant | TE Timothy Starnes  |
|  Evangel | TE Craig Childs, Vice Chairman  |
|  Mid America | TE Patrick Cook  |
|  Mississippi Valley | RE Guerrant Smathers  |
|  North Texas | TE David Clelland  |
|  Pacific | TE Allen Mawhinney, Chairman  |
|  Palmetto | RE William Reid  |
|  Philadelphia | RE Kenneth Rush, Secretary  |
|  Southern Florida | RE James Stewart  |
|  Tennessee Valley | RE C. Robson, Jr.  |
|  Westminster | RE Delbert Nichols  |

Those absent were:

|  Delmarva | TE Larry Wanasalja  |
| --- | --- |
|  New River | RE Harry Gardner  |
|  Northeast | RE Jack Merry  |
|  Southeast Alabama | RE Durwood Judah  |
|  Western Carolina | RE William Dillingham  |

Complainants present: Respondents present:

|  TE Robert Reymond | TE Wilson Benton  |
| --- | --- |
|  TE Rodney Stortz | TE Ron Lutjens  |
|  TE Michael Osborne | TE Donald MacNair  |
|  RE Randall Stone |   |

TE Allen Mawhinney was elected chairman and RE Kenneth Rush was elected secretary.

The chairman enjoined the members to recollect and regard their high character as judges of the court of Jesus Christ and the solemn duty in which they are about to engage.

With the permission of both the complainant and respondent, it was moved, seconded, and carried to read only those parts of the record of the case they request.

The record was received and found by all parties to be correct except: (1) Item #3 in the letter submitted April 30, 1988 by the Stated Clerk of the Missouri Presbytery was not understandable to the commission, the complainant or respondent, none of whom considered it to be of importance; (2) the minutes of April 15-16, 18, 29, 1988 were missing but subsequently secured, copied and distributed to all members of the commission.

TE Robert Reymond presented the complaint.

The commission recessed for lunch with prayer at noon, and reconvened at 1:10 p.m. with prayer.

The commission recessed at 2:00 p.m. to hear the report of the Ad-Interim Committee to the General Assembly.

<!-- PAGE ga=16 pdf_page=220 printed_page=null -->

The commission reconvened at 6:55 p.m. A concern was expressed by members of the commission about whether we were property constituted. It was moved, seconded, and carried to appoint a sub-committee of five people to frame a motion to be presented to the General Assembly to clarify the question. TEs Jim Braden, Craig Childs, Allen Mawhinney and Don Smyth and RE Kenneth Rush were appointed and prepared the following motion:

Moved that the 16th General Assembly rule that the Judicial Commission to adjudicate Case #5 is properly constituted with a membership of 15 and a quorum of 10 in accord with *BCO* 15-3.

The commission recessed to meet again immediately after the inspirational service.

The commission reconvened at 9:30 p.m. with prayer. The chairman announced that the General Assembly did adopt the motion prepared by the sub-committee.

Dr. Reymond concluded his opening argument.

The commission recessed with prayer at 10:30 p.m. to reconvene at 8:00 a.m. on Wednesday, June 8, 1988.

The commission reconvened at 8:05 a.m. on June 8, 1988 and began its business with prayer.

TEs Ron Lutjens and Donald MacNair presented the opening argument for the respondents.

TE Wilson Benton concluded the opening argument for the respondents.

The commission asked questions of both the complainants and the respondents.

Moved, seconded, and carried to adjourn for lunch from 11:30 a.m. until 1:00 p.m. and that, immediately upon reconvening, additional questions may be addressed to the complainants and the respondents for a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.

The commission recessed at 11:30 and reconvened at 1:05 p.m.

The chairman indicated that he might not be present to present the judgment of the commission to the General Assembly and therefore recommended that we elect a vice-chairman.

TE Craig Childs was elected vice-chairman.

TEs Donald MacNair and Ron Lutjens presented the closing argument for the respondents.

TE Robert Reymond presented the closing argument for the complainants.

The commission went into closed session to discuss and consider the merits of the complaint.

Moved, seconded, and carried to set the order of the day at 5:00 p.m. for recess.

The commission overruled a ruling of the chairman that "amends" (in the event the complaint is affirmed) could be discussed prior to a vote.

The committee recessed with prayer at 5:10 p.m. until 8:00 a.m. Thursday, June 9, 1988.

The committee reconvened at 8:00 a.m. on Thursday, June 9, 1988. The meeting began with a season of prayer. TE Craig Childs assumed the chair.

Moved, seconded, and carried to excuse Commissioner James Braden immediately after a vote to return home because of the death of his father's wife.

Moved, seconded, and carried to end discussion, giving each member of the commission an opportunity to express his opinion, prior to taking a vote.

The commissioners prayed silently to prepare themselves to vote.

A motion to sustain the specifications of error (Rayburn, et al vs. Missouri Presbytery) failed 4-7-0.

Moved, seconded, and carried to confirm the decision of the lower court. 7-4-0.

Moved, seconded, and carried to adopt a minute explanatory.

Moved, seconded, and carried to table discussion of the minute explanatory until after a statement of facts and a statement of the issue has been approved, then to divide to write a minute explanatory and a dissent.

Moved, seconded, and carried to adopt the attached Statement of Facts. 10-0-0

Moved, seconded, and carried to adopt the attached Statement of Issue 10-0-0

Moved, seconded, and carried to adopt the attached Minute Explanatory. 6-0-4

(A dissenting opinion is being formulated and will be attached to the report).

Moved, seconded, and carried to adopt the attached Commendation. 10-0-0

Moved, seconded, and carried to read the minutes of the commission.

Moved, seconded, and carried to approved the minutes as read.

The Adjudication was read and approved as a whole.

Moved, seconded, and carried to recess until the call of the chairman.

The commission reconvened at 5:05 p.m. to read the report editorially to the complainants and respondents.

The commission adjourned at 5:30 p.m. with prayer.

<!-- PAGE ga=16 pdf_page=221 printed_page=null -->

All commissioners originally present but not present at the conclusion of the commission meeting
were duly excused by the commission.

Respectfully submitted,
TE Craig Childs, Vice-chairman
RE Kenneth W. Rush, Secretary

TE Joseph Pipa moved that the following dissent be printed in the Minutes, and the
list of those concurring in the dissent appears immediately following it. The motion
was adopted.

DISSENT

1, The undersigned dissent from the adjudication of the Sixteenth General Assembly on Case #5
on the grounds that the respondents’ view with its four qualifications as set forth in the April 16, 1988,
motion of the Missouri Presbytery is fundamentally out of accord with the doctrine of the Presbyterian Church in America.

We find two earlier decisions of the General Assembly (1980, Bogue ef al vs. Presbytery of the
Ascension; 1986, Gentry et al vs. Calvary Presbytery) as having already expressed the view of the
denomination:
“The Constitutional Standards of the PCA do not allow for a type of continuing
revelation that is not canonical Scripture (which is complete) but is more than mere
illumination and providence, a type of non-authoritative, non-canonical, new
revelation,” (1986, Gentry et al vs. Calvary Presbytery),

2. The undersigned are also concerned for the purity and peace of the Church and the fulfillment of
the Great Commission. Toward that end we fervently pray that brothers in the Missouri Presbytery will
be reconciled and walk in mutual love and confidence,

3. The undersigned further believe that Overture 25 (submitted as evidence in this case) has been
answered by previous General Assembly considerations on this issue.

TE Mike Ahlberg, RE Robert K. Ashbaugh, TE William Bales, TE Larry E. Ball, TE Lonnie Barnes, TE
Roland S. Bares, TE Thomas F. Barnes, TE William H. Bell, Jr., TE Mike Biggs, TE Carl W. Bogue,
TE James E. Bordwine, TE. David Boxerman, TE G. Brent Bradley, TE David J. Brewer, TE Mike
Briggs, TE Arthur C. Broadwick, RE Harry Brodmann, Jr., TE Richard Burguet, RE Charles W. Burns,
TE Bob Burridge, TE John Owen Butler, TE Bailey Cadman, TE Marvin L, Camp, TE LeRoy S. Capper,
TE E. C. Case, TE Jack Cash, TE Stephen R. Christian, TE John P. Clark, Sr., TE Edmund P. Clowney,
RE Charles R. Coe, Jr., RE David Coffin, TE David C. Coleman, TE Michael L, Coleman, TE Larry D,
Conard, TE George A. Crocker, RE Bill Cross, TE King A. Counts, TE Mark L. Dalbey, TE Anthony R.
Dallison, TE Lamar Davis, RE Daniel M. DeLange, TE Bill Dever, TE David Dively, TE Douglas C.
Domin, TE Robert Drake, RE Henry Drisy, RE Charles R. Dunlap, TE Ronald W. Dunton, TE Dennis D.
Eide, TE Larry R, Elenbaum, TE Thomas Talbot Ellis, TE Raymond B. Fell, TE LeRoy H. Ferguson III,
TE Bill Fitzhenry, RE Gary S, Flye, RE Roy C. Frazer, TE David Frierson, TE Stan Gale, TE Kenneth L.
Gentry, Jr., TE Danie] Gilchrist, TE David Gilleran, TE Lawrence Gilpin, TE Joel R. Granados, TE
Randall R. Greenwald, TE Joe Grider, TE Howard Griffith, TE Grover E. Gunn III, TE Timothy G.
Habbershon, RE Vance Hall, RE Gerald F. Hardcastle, TE William Harrell, RE William M. Harris IV,
TE Vaughn E. Hathaway, Jr., TE R. G. Hellings, RE R. E. Hilton, TE Carl C. Howell, Jr., TE Bruce B.
Howes, RE Philip W. Hufnell, TE Henry E. Johnson, TE Philip G. Kayser, TE Joel Kershner, TE Randy
Kimbrough, TE Rodney King, TE John C. Kinser, RE John W. Lane, RE Raymond H. Larson, RE
Richard R. Larson, TE Jack Lash, TE James Ted Lester, TE Ross Lindley, RE Larry Lumsford, RE
Willard H. Lutz, RE D. Robert Maddox, TE Jerry 1. Maguire, TE Clarence R. Mays, TE Alan McCall,
RE James McGowan, TE D. B. McWilliams, RE Burke E. Moore, , TE Erwin
Morison, TE Daniel R. Morse, TE Frank D, Moser, TE Joseph Mullen, . R, lay) Neikirk, TE
Bruce D. Nickoley, TE James T. O'Brien, TE Lawrence B. Oldaker, TE Robert C. Peterson, TE Joseph
A. Pipa, Jr., TE Mike Pollock, TE Donald H. Post, Jr., TE Stephen Pribble, TE Jeff A. Rakes, TE James
P, Raun, TE James Reedy, TE John K, Reeves, TE Scott L. Reiber, TE Joe L. Reynolds, TE John R-
Riddle, RE C. Douglas Rolis, Jr., TE John C. Ropp, Jr., TE William H. Rose, TE Michael F. Ross, TE
Petros Roukas, RE Kenneth W. Rush, TE Carl G. Russell, TE Michael Schneider, TE James W. Serio,
TE Paul G. Setle, RE Wilhelmus J. Schaffers, TE Wally Sherbon, TE Jayme S. Sickert, RE Amold
Siepkes, TE Gregg Singer, TE Dale L. Smith, TE Frank E. Smith, TE Frank J. Smith, TE Morton H,
Smith, TE Richard O, Smith, Jr., TE Daniel R. Smyth, TE Byron Snapp, TE Dallard J. Stanton, TE W. J,
Stanway, TE Peter Stazen II, RE Thomas J, Stein, TE Brad Stewart, TE Donald D. Stone, TE Stanley
Sundberg, RE Richard W. Teague, RE Will P. Thompson, TE John A. Tinsley, RE Wister B, Traynhamp,

<!-- PAGE ga=16 pdf_page=222 printed_page=null -->

TE James W. Truitt, TE Charles E. Turner, TE M. Steve Wallace, RE Charles Watson, TE Loren V. Watson, RE Jimmy Watts, RE Harold E. Whitlock, TE Randy Wilding, RE Steve Wilkins, TE S. Scott Willet, TE Ford Williams, TE John W. Wilson, TE Larry W. Wilson, TE Victor W. Wolf, Jr., TE Joe A. Wolfe, and RE Mike Zimansky.

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
