# Case p71 — SJC judicial decision (GA 24, p.71)

**Court:** SJC  ·  **Assembly:** 24th (1996)  ·  **Disposition:** —

*Source: [ga24_1996 pp. 71–72](../markdown/ga24_1996.md)*

---

MINUTES OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY

indicate that the case would be opened in the court for further consideration after the commission had made its report, but its judgment should be entered upon the records of the court as the judgment of the court itself. In this case, this was done, and the judgment of the commission became the judgment of the Assembly.” [J. D. Leslie, *Presbyterian Law and Procedure in the Presbyterian Church in the United States*. Richmond, VA: Presbyterian Committee of Publication, 1930, pp.119-20.]

We are, therefore, recommending that the PCA adopt essentially this procedure, though with a series of proposals that we believe will help prevent the system from being abused. With respect to such protections, the Assembly should recall that the SJC, in consultation with the AICJP, has already enacted a number of significant improvements in the “Manual for Standing Judicial Commission”. These include:

- the requirement that all Panel members certify that they have read the Record of the Case and all briefs submitted before being permitted to vote;
- the requirement that all Commission members at the meeting of the full Commission to adopt a decision certify that they have read the Judicial Panel’s proposed decision, all briefs, and those portions of the Record of the Case each one believes is necessary to understand the case before being permitted to vote;
- the requirement that judicial cases before the SJC by Reference be heard before the full Commission instead of panels; and
- that action on proposed Panel decisions no longer be handled by mail, but at full Commission meetings, with debate and amendment allowed on each part of a proposed Panel decision (Facts, Issues, Judgment, Reasoning and Opinion) at the time of adoption by the full Commission.

Further, the Assembly should recall the Twenty-third General Assembly’s adoption, on recommendation from the AICJP, of an amendment to RAO 15-3 establishing a pool system for the appointment of Judicial Panels that removes any ground for concern with respect to partiality.

The AICJP brings to the Twenty-fourth General Assembly ten numbered recommendations that have all been unanimously approved by the Committee. As printed, each recommendation includes a statement of the issue, the proposal itself, and some statement as to the Committee’s rationale for its adoption, so we will not repeat that material here. Note, however, that in general these recommendations are designed to foster justice in our system, as well as the *perception* that our system is just. If they achieve only the latter, our labor will have been worthwhile, for such a perception is essential to the moral and spiritual force we trust our discipline will have for the good of the church. As the Preliminary Principles of the first American Presbyterian Form of Government remind us:

“Since ecclesiastical discipline must be purely moral or spiritual in its object, and not attended with any civil effects, it can derive no force whatever, but from its own

justice, the approbation of an impartial public, and the countenance and blessing of the great Head of the Church universal.” (emphasis added)

## Concerning SJC Nomination and Election Procedures

Many have expressed concern that the current procedures for nomination and election to the SJC are liable to abuse. Having considered the matter at length, the Committee can reach no consensus on a method to effectively improve the process for election of members of the Standing Judicial Commission. The AICJP examined carefully a proposal to limit the right of nomination from the floor to those previously proposed by presbyteries. However, some on the Committee were concerned that such an expedient would violate the important right of an Assembly to appoint whomever it saw fit to serve. Further, some on the Committee feared that such a provision would restrict a liberty that makes for strength (as well as being liable to abuse), the Assembly being able to recognize the ability of a commissioner to serve, even if for some reason his presbytery does not. Additionally, some on the Committee believed that any changes to election procedures should not be limited to the SJC and therefore it would be beyond the purview of this committee to recommend such changes. In the Committee’s judgment the best hope for the just appointment of SJC members under the current system is a principled consideration, free of party spirit, by each commissioner at the Assembly as to who will best serve the Church, and a prayerful charity, with a determination to avoid conspiratorial appearances or allegations, exercised by all.

## Proposal for Reporting to the Twenty-fourth General Assembly

The AICJP recommends that the Assembly hear the Committee’s report for up to one hour under the rules for “informal consideration” (Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised, 1990 ed., pp. 533-34), with the adoption of a rule (2/3 vote required) that under informal consideration no motions with respect to the recommendations or the report are in order. During informal consideration the Committee will review its report, respond to questions, and lead in discussion of the recommendations seriatim. The conclusion of informal consideration shall be at the end of the hour, or upon adoption, by a majority vote, of a motion “that the question be considered formally.” In the Committee’s judgment this procedure will afford commissioners the fullest possible understanding of the various proposals and their ramifications before being asked to vote.

## Proposed Rule for Consideration of Recommendation 4

In recommendation number 4 the Committee is proposing that the Assembly adopt a number of amendments to The Book of Church Order and the “Rules of Assembly Operation” in one “package.” This recommendation is the heart of our response to the assignment given to us by the Twenty-first General Assembly, to wit, “to review our current General Assembly judicial procedures, evaluating their comparative strengths and weaknesses [and] report . . . with recommendations, if any, for further perfection of our judicial procedures.”

Recommendation 4 is a carefully framed proposal, the fruit of three years of study,
discovery, discussion and principled compromise, an dino ur judgment each of the parts
is integral to the whole. Thus we are recommending that, after extensive opportunity
for Assembly discussion and deliberation, the “package” be adopted without
amendment, or be recommitted to the Committee for further study and recommendation.

throughout our study we have sought the counsel of any and all who had insight to aid
us in our task, and have benefited much from those who were willing to respond. The
Committee does not now suppose that its work is perfect, and our procedural
recommendation is not grounded in any such presumption. Since our procedural
recommendation, if adopted, will preclude amendment from the floor, we want to give a
final opportunity for commissioners to offer advice for the perfection of the
Committee’s report.

Therefore, if commissioners discover portions of this “package” that a rein need of
adjustment or correction, the Committee urges that recommendations be submitted in
writing to the chairman of the Committee, either by mail (David F. Coffin, Jr., P.O. Box
580, Fairfax, VA, 22030; e-mail, 102772.1327@compuserve.com), or at the pre-
Assembly informational meeting concerning the Committee’s report (Tuesday, June 18,
1996 at 1:30 pm). Immediately after that Seminar, the Committee will meet to consider
any proposed corrections, so that the “package” recommendation can reflect the fullest
consideration possible, consistent with the need, in the Committee’s judgment, to
preserve the essential characteristics of those parts that are integral to the whole.

RECOMMENDATIONS
A. Preliminary Proposals

1. Postpone final action on item 2 (p. 56)
The committee recommends that the 24th assembly postpone consideration of
Item 2, proposed amendment to BCO 15, until the 25th General Assembly.
Adopted

2. Proposed amendment to BCO Preface. II. Preliminary Principles. 8.
Issue: restore the original sense of “Preliminary Principle” number 8.
Proposed Amendment
a. substitute for the whole of number 8 the following:
“8. Since ecclesiastical discipline must be purely moral or spiritual in its
object, and not attended with any civil effects, it can derive no force
whatever, but from its own justice, the approbation of an impartial
public, and the countenance and blessing of the great head of the
Church.”
b. Add the following paragraph as the unnumbered conclusion to the entire
section on Preliminary Principles:

“If the preceding scriptural principles be steadfastly adhered to, the vigor and strictness of government and discipline, applied with pastoral prudence and Christian love, will contribute to the glory and well-being of the Church.”

*Adopted and sent down to presbyteries for advice and consent.*

**Grounds:**

At the Second General Assembly of the PCA this paragraph was amended to modernize and clarify the text [M2GA, (1974), p. 55]. Inadvertently, a very important element in the original “Preliminary Principles” of 1788 was lost and the paragraph made redundant (cf. #7). The original added to the assertion that church power is moral and spiritual in #7 an assertion concerning how such moral and spiritual power is made effective absent the claim to “civil effects.” The amendment seeks to restore the original sense.

## 3. Procedural Check-list for PCA Rules of Discipline

The Committee recommends that the “Procedural Checklist for PCA Rules of Discipline” (Appendix, II) be made available, upon request, from the Stated Clerk’s office, and that notice of its availability be printed in the Appendix to the BCO.
*Adopted*

## B. The “Package”

## 4. Proposed amendments “for the further perfection of our judicial procedures”

The Committee recommends that the following amendments (I.-VII.) to BCO and RAO be adopted —

(a) without amendment;
(b) at this Assembly, according to the voting provisions for suspending or amending Rules of Assembly Operation (RAO 18);
(c) with the provision that the RAO amendments proposed be adopted contingent upon final approval of the proposed BCO amendments; and
(d) when BCO 15-1, 4, and 5, are sent down to the Presbyteries, and again voted on at the 25th General Assembly, the normal voting procedures (BCO 26-2, -3) be followed.
*Adopted*

## I. BCO 15-1 and 15-5

Issue: Decisions of the Standing Judicial Commission made final, yet with the possibility of a minority report.

### Proposed amendments

1. Substitute for current BCO 15-1 the following:
“15-1. A commission differs from an ordinary committee in that while a committee is appointed to examine, consider and report, a commission is authorized to deliberate upon and conclude the business referred to it, except in the case of judicial commissions

MINUTES OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY

of a Presbytery appointed under *BCO* 15-3. A commission shall keep a full record of its proceedings, which shall be submitted to the court appointing it. Upon such submission this record shall be entered on the minutes of the court appointing, except in the case of a presbytery commission serving as a session or a judicial commission as set forth in *BCO* 15-3. Every commission of a Presbytery or Session must submit complete minutes and a report of its activities at least once annually to the court which commissioned it.”

2. Substitute for current *BCO* 15-5 the following:

“15-5. a. In the cases committed to it, the Standing Judicial Commission shall have the judicial powers and be governed by the judicial procedures of the General Assembly. The decision of the Standing Judicial Commission shall be the final decision of the General Assembly except as set forth below, to which there may be no complaint or appeal. Members of the Standing Judicial Commission may file concurring or dissenting opinions, or a minority report as set forth in (c) below. The General Assembly may direct the Standing Judicial Commission to retry a case if upon the review of its minutes exceptions are taken with respect to that case.

b. In each case the Standing Judicial Commission shall issue a summary of the facts, a statement of the issues, its judgment and its reasoning, together with any concurring or dissenting opinions, all of which shall be entered on the minutes of the General Assembly and shall be reported by the Stated Clerk to the next General Assembly. The judgment shall be effective from the time of its announcement to the parties.

c. (1) If, within twenty-four hours of the time of adjournment of a Standing Judicial Commission meeting at which a final decision was rendered in a case, at least one third (1/3) of the voting members of the Standing Judicial Commission file written notice of their intention to file a minority decision with the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly, and within twenty days from the adjournment do file such a minority decision, such minority decision shall be considered a minority report and shall be referred, with the report of the Standing Judicial Commission, to the General Assembly. In each instance “file” shall be understood as defined by the Manual of the Standing Judicial Commission.

(2) No such reference from the Standing Judicial Commission shall be considered by the General Assembly unless the report of the Standing Judicial Commission and the minority

report have been mailed to the clerk of session of each church at
least thirty (30) days prior to the meeting of the General Assembly.
(3) The Assembly shall act upon such a reference from the
Standing Judicial Commission, in each case without question,
discussion, debate, or amendment, as follows:
(a) The Standing Judicial Commission shall have 30 minutes to
present its decision to the Assembly.
(b) The minority shall have 30 minutes to present its decision to
the Assembly.
(c) The Standing Judicial Commission shall have 10 minutes to
reply to the minority report.
(d) the decision of the minority shall be proposed and the
General Assembly shall, without question, discussion, debate,
or amendment approve or disapprove of the minority report.
(e) If the General Assembly disapproves the minority report, the
General Assembly shall take up the decision of the Standing Judicial Commission and without question, discussion,
debate, or amendment, approve or disapprove of the decision
of the Standing Judicial Commission.
(4) if the General Assembly approves of a proposed decision, it
shall bethe decision of the General Assembly, and printed in its
minutes. There may be no complaint or appeal from such a final
decision of the General Assembly. If the General Assembly finally
disapproves of both proposed decisions, it must set the case for
hearing before the General Assembly or a special commission
appointed by it, and in either instance the case shall be tried on the
record as delivered to the stated clerk. Any such special commission
shall then proceed to consider the case and shall report its decision, in
like manner, to the General Assembly for its approval or disapproval.
In any event, the full record of the case, including written testimony
of witnesses, all documents, exhibits and papers shall be delivered to
the stated clerk for permanent preservation.”
Grounds:
In most cases the SJC ought to function as a true commission, in the
historic presbyterians en se of the term, concluding the business
referred to it. Prudence, on the other hand, as well as lessons learned
from the experience of other denominations, suggests that when the
SJC itself is seriously divided, the matter ought to be referred to the
broader Assembly for final action. This amendment provides for
both.

Note: In the AICJP’s judgment, as BCO Chapter 45 is now worded,
dissents, protests and objections would not be permitted against an

sjc decision by commissioners of the General Assembly to which as
SJC decision is announced, but would be permitted if a case is
referred to the General Assembly for final action through the
minority decision procedure.

II. BCO 15-4
Issue: the proper conception of the assembly and a commission.
Proposed Amendment:
add the italicized words to the third sentence of b co 15-4, so as to read:
“Each class shall serve a four year term, and each subsequent Assembly
should declare the Standing Judicial Commission as a whole to be its
commission."
Grounds:
a commission is not a body separate from the Assembly, with delegated
powers, acting on its behalf. Rather, a commission is the Assembly itself,
exercising its own Christ-appointed powers, determining to act for
particular purposes, with a more limited number of commissioners. Thus
it is appropriate that each successive assembly approve of those
members commissioned to act as the Assembly for Judicial purposes for
that year. At the same time, for prudential reasons ( WCF 6.1), in such a
“needful work” (BCO 8-4), it is profitable for there to be some
presumption in favor of a pre-established continuity in such a commission from year to year. The sentence, as amended, provides for both
concerns.

III. RAO 15-1, second sentence
Issue: vows for members of the Standing Judicial Commission.
Proposed amendment
Add a new second sentence as follows:
Upon election, each new member of the Standing Judicial Commission, be fo reentering upon the duties of this office, shall sign
a printed copy of the following vows; further, if the newly elected
member is present, he shall affirm these vows in the presence of the
Assembly electing him:
I do solemnly vow, by the assistance of the grace of God, in my
service as a judge in this branch of the church of our lord jesus
Christ, that
1. I will act as before God, my judge and the searcher of hearts;
2. I will judge without respect to persons, and if so tempted, will
recuse m yself from judgment;
3. I will judge not according to appearances, but judge righteous
judgment;
4. i will judge according to the constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America, through my best efforts applied to nothing

other thant he record of the case and other documents properly
before me; and
5. if ina given case i find my view on a particular issue to be in
conflict with the constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America, i will r ec use myself from such case, if I cannot
conscientiously apply the Constitution.
Grounds:
the proposed vow swill help strengthen and direct members of the
sjc in their calling as those judging on behalf of the church (cf.
WCF 22.6). The question underlying these vows is not whether
scripture or constitutions hall bethe final judge of controversies—
our answer is without hesitation “the Scripture”. Rather the question
is shall controversies be settled by the individual judge’s private view
of the Scripture’s teaching, orb y an application of the Church’s
publicly adopted view of Scripture’s teaching as embodied in her
Constitution. as presbyterians affirming a constitutional form of
government our answer should be without hesitation the latter.

IV. RAO 15-1, third paragraph
Issue: constitutional review of the procedures of the SJC.
Proposed amendment
Add a third paragraph as follows:
The minutes, but not the judicial cases, decisions, or reports, of the
Standing Judicial Commission shall be reviewed annually by the
Committee on Constitutional Business. The minutes shall be
examined for conformity to “Manual for Standing Judicial Commission” and RAO 15, violations of which shall be reported as
“exceptions” as defined in RAO 13-14.d.2. With respect to this
examination, the Committee on Constitutional Business shall report
directly to the General Assembly. If exceptions are taken with
respect to a case, the Assembly may find this a ground to direct the
Standing Judicial Commission to retry the case.
Grounds:
for the sake of proper accountability, there is need fora means of
constitutional review of Standing Judicial Commission procedures
by the General Assembly.

### V. RAO 15-5

Issue: That provisions in RAO should not duplicate provisions in BCO.
Proposed amendment:
The Committee recommends that RAO 15-5 be removed in its
entirety, and the subsequent section be renumbered accordingly.

Grounds:
the provisions of the deleted paragraph are found in the proposed
amendment to BCO 15-5.

VI. RAO 15-6
Issue: GA authority over the SJC Manual.
a. Proposed amendment
Substitute for the current paragraph the following:
15-6. The Standing Judicial Commission shall be governed by the
provisions of the constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America
and the rules of assembly Operation. Specific directions governing
the implementation of these provisions shall beset forth ina “Manual
for Standing Judicial Commission”, as adopted by the General Assembly. Amendments to this manual may be proposed to the
General Assembly by overture from a presbytery (cf. Article X), or
by recommendation from the Standing Judicial Commission.
Proposed amendments from either source shall be reported to the
Assembly by the Standing Judicial Commission, and shall be adopted
upon a two thirds vote of those voting which must also b ea majority
of the total enrollment of commissioners. This manual shall be
printed a san appendix to the rules of assembly Operation.
Grounds:
unlike the manuals for the committees of the General Assembly, the
“Manual for Standing Judicial Commission” contains rules and
procedures that effect and safeguard substantial due process in the
complaint and appeals procedures of the PCA. As this is the case,
the manual should be under the direct authority of the broadest
representation of the General Assembly.

b. Adoption of the “Manual For Standing Judicial Commission”
the committee recommends that the current version of “Manual For
Standing Judicial Commission” be adopted.
Grounds:
In the Committee’s judgment the Manual as it now stands has been
accurately framed according to the principles of the Book of Church Order, and wisely informed by the needs of practical cases. As this
is the case, and believing that it would be imprudent to open the
Manual for amendment from the floor at this time — and given the
new procedures for amendment as needed — the Committee
recommends that it be adopted in its entirety without detailed
discussion or amendment.

## VII. RAO 17-5

Issue: Remove former procedures for dealing with SJC reports.

### Proposed amendment

Strike all of paragraph 17-5, and renumber the following sections.

### Grounds:

The procedures of this paragraph are replaced by the proposed amendments to *BCO* 15 and RAO 15-5.

*Adopted with BCO amendments sent down to presbyteries for advice and consent.*

The vote was 791 to 17.

## C. Standards For Review

5. Proposed amendment to *BCO 39, Modes in Which the Proceedings of Lower Courts Come Under the Supervision of Higher Courts*.

Issue: There is a need for a common standard of judicial review, clearly reflecting Presbyterian constitutional principles, to guide the higher courts in fulfilling their obligations under this chapter.

### Proposed Amendment

Add new section 39-3 as follows:

39-3. While affirming that the Scripture is “the supreme judge by which all controversies of religion are to be determined” (WCF 1.10), and that the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America is “subordinate to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, the inerrant Word of God” (BCO Preface, III), and while affirming also that this Constitution is fallible (WCF 31.3), the Presbyterian Church in America affirms that this subordinate and fallible Constitution has been “adopted by the church” (BCO Preface, III) “as standard expositions of the teachings of Scripture in relation to both faith and practice” (BCO 29-1) and as setting forth a form of government and discipline “in conformity with the general principles of biblical polity” (BCO 21-5.3). To insure that this Constitution is not amended, violated or disregarded in judicial process, any review of the judicial proceedings of a lower court by a higher court shall be guided by the following principles:

1. A higher court, reviewing a lower court, should limit itself to the issues raised by the parties to the case in the original (lower) court. Further, the higher court should resolve such issues by applying the Constitution of the church, as previously established through the constitutional process.

2. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great deference to a lower court regarding those factual matters which the lower court is more competent to determine, because of its proximity to the events in question, and because of its personal knowledge and observations of the parties and witnesses involved. Therefore, a higher court should not reverse a factual finding of a lower court, unless there is clear error on the part of the lower court.

3. A higher court should ordinarily exhibit great deference to a lower court regarding those matters of discretion and judgment which can only be

MINUTES OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY

addressed by a court with familiar acquaintance of the events and parties. Such matters of discretion and judgment would include, but not be limited to: the moral character of candidates for sacred office, the appropriate censure to impose after a disciplinary trial, or judgment about the comparative credibility of conflicting witnesses. Therefore, a higher court should not reverse such a judgment by a lower court, unless there is clear error on the part of the lower court.

4. The higher court does have the power and obligation of judicial review, which cannot be satisfied by always deferring to the findings of a lower court. Therefore, a higher court should not consider itself obliged to exhibit the same deference to a lower court when the issues being reviewed involve the interpretation of the Constitution of the Church. Regarding such issues, the higher court has the duty and authority to interpret and apply the Constitution of the Church according to its best abilities and understanding, regardless of the opinion of the lower court.

Adopted with BCO amendments sent down to presbyteries for advice and consent.

Grounds:

The Constitution of the PCA — setting forth a summary of biblical doctrine, morals and government, and those prudential regulations necessary for edification, decency and order (WCF 1.6) — constitutes the articles of unity of the PCA, and therefore must serve as the standard for judicial review. This proposal will help insure that in judicial review the Constitution actually functions as intended, and is not amended, violated or disregarded in judicial process. Further, clear standards of judicial review will help to preserve the Constitutional gradation of authority while upholding each court's rights and responsibilities.

D. Recommendations with regard to business referred

6. The Committee recommends that Overture 3 (1993), from Westminster Presbytery, to amend BCO 15-5 to permit discussion and question of its decisions [M21GA (1993), pp. 119-20], be answered in the negative. Adopted

OVERTURE 3 (1993) From the Presbytery of Westminster

"Amend BCO 15-5 to Permit Discussion on Judicial Cases"

Whereas, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in America is the highest court of the Church (BCO 14-1), and

Whereas, a function of a court is the hearing and determination of cases, and

Whereas, "It belongs to synods and councils ministerially. . . to receive complaints in cases of mal-administration, and authoritatively to determine the same." (WCF XXXI, III; cf. Matt. 18:18); and

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
