# 2008-01/2008-10 — Complaint of Crossroads Community Church Session and Complaints of RE Mark Grasso, et al. vs. Philadelphia Presbytery

**Court:** Standing Judicial Commission  ·  **Assembly:** 37th (2009)  ·  **Disposition:** denied; Presbytery's actions affirmed  ·  **Dissent:** yes

*Source: [ga37_2009 pp. 176–193](../markdown/ga37_2009.md#ga37-p176)*

---

**SESSION OF CROSSROADS COMMUNITY CHURCH**

**SJC 2008-01**

**RE MARK GRASSO ET AL**

**SJC 2008-10**

**VS.**

**PHILADELPHIA PRESBYTERY**

**I. SUMMARY OF THE FACTS**

1. September 12, 2007-At the stated meeting of Philadelphia Presbytery
(PP), Mr. Jason Hsu, a ministerial candidate, was examined for
licensure. Mr. Hsu stated several possible differences as to the
_Westminster Confession of Faith_ and the _BCO_ including a difference
_regarding the office of deacon (BCO 7.2)._ Mr. Hsu stated as follows:

I affirm that only men should be ordained as elders and deacons.
However, I believe that the office of deacon can also be held by
women. My reasons for this:
(1) The biblical injunctions against women are with regard to
authority and teaching, and since the office of deacon is not one
of authority or teaching, but of service, (BCO 7.2) these biblical
injunctions do not apply to women holding the office of deacon.
(2) I believe that there are two biblically faithful interpretations of
1 Timothy 3. One interpretation sees verse 11 as referring to
wives of deacons, and the second interpretation sees verse 11 as
referring to women deacons. I hold to the second interpretation,
which then creates space for women to hold the office of deacon.
My exegetical reasons for this interpretation are as follows:
(2a) Gunaikas is accusative and not genitive, and is more
literally translated “women” than “their wives.”
(2b) The word “likewise,” which appears in verse 8 to modify
“deacons,” also appears in verse 11 to modify “women.”
In verse 8, the “likewise” is used to show that the office
of deacon is to be like the office of elder in that they both
have certain requirements. So in verse 11, it follow that
the “likewise” is used to show that the office of women

deacons is to be like the offices of elder and men deacons
in that they all have certain requirements. Other reasons
for this interpretation of 1 Timothy 3:
(2c) Given that the office of the elder is a more foundational
office than deacon, it doesn’t make sense to base the
qualification of a deacon partially on the conduct of his

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=179 printed_page=177 -->

wife when no such requirement is made for an elder,
though both elders and deacons are required to be good
parents. It makes more sense to read the verse separately
as a requirement for women deacons.
(2d) Romans 16:1-2 identifies Phoebe as a deaconess,
suggesting that the early church did in fact have women
deacons. Again, I believe that there are two biblically
faithful interpretations of 1 Timothy 3, but I hold to the
interpretation that allows women to hold the office of
deacon. I do not, however, believe that women should be
ordained to the office of deacon. The reason for this is
because ordination is about calling someone to a position
that is recognized on a denomination-wide level. And
since the PCA denomination does not ordain women
deacons, in order to keep the unity of the church, I affirm
that women should not be ordained as deacons. (ROC, p.
36-B). [3]

2. October 11, 2007-The Session of Crossroads Community Church
PCA (CCCPCA) filed a complaint against PP for its action to approve
the licensure of Mr. Hsu, taking exception to his view regarding
women and the office of deacon. (ROC, pp. 20, 41, 48, 61).

3. November 10, 2007-PP referred the complaint to a study committee
to address four separate issues pertaining to the role of women and
the office of deacon. (ROC p. 41) _Note:_ Only issues 2 & 4 as
presented by the Stated Clerk’s summary and item 2 as referred to a
special committee are germane to the Complaint as filed with the GA
by the Session of CCCPCA.

PP proceeded to examine and to approve Licentiate Hsu for
ordination on all parts except to delay final action to deal with his
stated difference regarding the role of women and the office of
deacon (ROC 47). During the examination the Leadership
Development Team (LDT) classified the stated difference of Mr. Hsu
to the _BCO_ as “not to be considered ‘technically’ as ‘an exception to

All references to the ROC referred to herein are from the _Revised_

Record of the Case dated Jan 27, 2009.

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=180 printed_page=178 -->

our confessional standards,’ since it is an exception to our principles
of Church Government.” (ROC 45)

4. January 26, 2008-PP held a called meeting to hear the report of its
study committee (ROC 22) and to act on the complaint filed by the
Session of CCCPCA. In addition to hearing the report from the
committee, the Session of CCCPCA presented an argument to PP
supporting the complaint. (ROC p. 20). The Presbytery proceeded to
act on the matter by approving the recommendation of the committee
to answer the complaint in the negative. (ROC p. 26, 28).

The committee report notes a 1984 GA judicial case supporting the
position of the committee’s recommendation. The committee report
also contains the statement that Mr. Hsu vowed to practice only what
is consistent with the principles of the _BCO_ and not his own personal
view in this matter. (ROC p. 30)

5. February 20, 2008 - PP held a called meeting to complete Mr. Hsu’s
ordination examination. The minutes of that meeting at paragraph 0802-04 (ROC p. 79) include the following:

During the course of the examination, Mr. Hsu gave these answers:

- The candidate affirmed that he would not ordain women to the

office of deacon.

- The candidate stated that he would feel more comfortable with a
diaconal team (“Mercy Team”) comprised of men and women,
who are not ordained.

- As the candidate understands the _BCO_, in the absence of deacons,
the role of deacons falls upon the elders, and a ministry team
composed of men and women are permitted to assist the deacons
in their ministry (9-7)

- The candidate stated that if the session of the church that the

candidate is called to ordains men deacons, he would submit to
this.

- The candidate takes no exception to the _BCO_ for women to be
ordained to the office of either Teaching or Ruling elder.

6. February 20, 2008 - At the called meeting of PP the ordination
examination of Mr. Hsu’s was sustained. His call as a TE was
approved, and Mr. Hsu’s stated difference regarding women and the
office of deacon was classified as an exception of substance not

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=181 printed_page=179 -->

striking at the vitals of religion. A commission was appointed for his
ordination service (ROC 79).

7. February 20, 2008-The Session of CCCPCA filed a complaint with
the PCA against PP in its action to answer in the negative the
complaint of CCCPCA. (ROC pp. 10-19) (SJC No. 2008-1).

8. March 21, 2008-RE Mark A. Grasso, RE Dudley Reese, IV, and
TE David A. Van Meerbeke filed a Complaint with PP against the
action of PP in approving for ordination Mr. Jason Hsu at its February
20, 2008 called meeting.

9. May 10, 2008 - PP at its stated meeting heard the complaint (ROC,
p. 82). While there are draft minutes indicating that Presbytery denied
the complaint (ROC pp. 3-4), there is no evidence in the approved
minutes of Presbytery that Presbytery acted on the complaint. At the
hearing, both parties clearly stipulated that the complaint had been
denied by Presbytery.”

10. June 8, 2008-RE Mark Grasso, et al filed a Complaint against
Philadelphia Presbytery with the Stated Clerk of the PCA. (SJC 200810).

**II. STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES**

A. Did Philadelphia Presbytery err when it approved for licensure a
candidate who
(1) stated a difference with the _Book of Church Order_ as to a
woman’s eligibility to serve in the office of deacon, but who
(2) affirmed that he would conduct his ministry in accordance with
the form of government established by the _Book of Church_
_Order_ ?

B. Did Philadelphia Presbytery err when it approved for ordination as a
teaching elder, a candidate who
(1) stated a difference with the _Book of Church Order_ as to a
woman’s eligibility to serve in the office of deacon, but who
(2) while stating some qualifications, affirmed that he would conduct
his ministry in accordance with the form of government
established by the _Book of Church Order_ ?

**III. JUDGMENT**

A. No.

B. No.

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=182 printed_page=180 -->

**IV.** **REASONING AND OPINION**

The _Book of Church Order_ defines our church Constitution as follows:

The Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America, which is subject
to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, the inerrant Word of
God, consists of its doctrinal standards set forth in the _Westminster_
_Confession of Faith_, together with the _Larger and Shorter Catechisms_,
and the _Book of Church Order_, comprising the Form of Government, the
Rules of Discipline and the Directory of Worship; all as adopted by the
Church. (Preface, Article III; _BCO_ 26-1).

This definition articulates two aspects of our Constitution – the _doctrinal_
_standards_ established by the WCF and its catechisms and the _Book of_
_Church Order,_ comprising the Form of Government, the Rules of
Discipline and the Directory of Worship. These two aspects – the
doctrinal standards and the _Book of Church Order_ – each have
authoritative standing as parts of the Constitution. However, the authority
exerted under each of these two aspects of our Constitution is not
identical. The doctrinal standards are the authoritative exposition of the
Scriptures for our denomination as to the matters addressed in them. The
_Book of Church Order_ is the authoritative statement of our practices as to
the matters contained therein.

In a similar manner, the standard by which conformity to these two
separate aspects of our Constitution is to be judged differs. Our doctrinal
standards establish the Biblical/theological system of doctrine to which
we subscribe. Adherence to this system of doctrine is judged by whether
a position held by a candidate for ordination strikes at “any fundamentals
of our system of doctrine.” ( _BCO_ 21-4). If the position is judged to
“strike at a fundamental” and to be either “hostile to the system” or to
“strike at the vitals of religion,” that difference is judged to be a reason to
deny ordination.

Our _Book of Church Order_ delineates _practices_ arising out of those
Biblical/theological convictions. However, candidates for ordination are
not required to “subscribe” to these practices, nor are they required to
alert their presbyteries in the event that they find themselves out of accord
with any of these practices. Instead, a candidate is asked to “approve the
form of government and discipline of the Presbyterian Church in
America, in conformity with the general principles of Biblical polity.”
( _BCO_ 21-5, vow 3).

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=183 printed_page=181 -->

This variation exists because the standard of “subscription” to our
doctrinal standards is a different, and higher, standard than the standard of
“approval” of the practices of our _Book of Church Order_ . This difference
is illustrated by the distinct affirmations made by candidates and officers
as to the doctrinal standards and the _Book of Church Order_ as well as the
method by which these two aspects of our Constitution are amended.

As stated earlier, candidates for licensure and for ordination as teaching
elders, ruling elders, and deacons must “receive and adopt” the doctrinal
standards set forth in the WCF and its catechisms. ( _BCO_ 19-3, Q.2; _BCO_
21-5, Vow 2; _BCO_ 24-6, Vow 2). In addition, officers ordained to office
must further promise, of their own initiative, to inform their Presbytery
(TEs) or session (REs and Deacons) if at any time they find themselves
“out of accord with any of the fundamentals of this system of doctrine.”

In contrast, the vow taken by those assuming ordained office only requires
that the candidate “approve” the form of government. ( _BCO_ 21-5,
Vow 3; _BCO_ 24-6, Vow 3). Further, although candidates for licensure are
examined as to their basic knowledge of church government as
established by the _Book of Church Order_ ( _BCO_ 19-2.b.3), the questions
posed to them for licensure make no mention of the form of government
at all. ( _BCO_ 19-3).

This distinction between the two aspects of our Constitution is also
recognized in the standards by which each may be amended. The
doctrinal standards may only be amended by approval of a proposed
amendment by:

(1) ¾ majority vote of the General Assembly,
(2) advice and consent of ¾ of the presbyteries, and
(3) ¾ majority vote of the subsequent meeting of the General Assembly.
( _BCO_ 26-3).
In contrast, the _Book of Church Order_ may be amended by:
(1) majority vote at a General Assembly,
(2) advice and consent of 2/3 of the presbyteries, and
(3) majority vote at the subsequent General Assembly.

The practical effect of this distinction may be seen in the fact that the
_Book of Church Order_ is amended in some facet at almost every General
Assembly, while the doctrinal standards have not been amended since
their adoption at the inception of our denomination.

The Complainants in these cases argue that differences with any aspect of
our Constitution must be handled and judged in the same manner. The

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=184 printed_page=182 -->

language of our Constitution and its own treatment of these two aspects –
doctrinal standards and the _Book of Church Order_ – require a different view.

Differences with our doctrinal standards are judged as to whether the
difference strikes at a fundamental of our system of doctrine and, if it
does, whether the difference is hostile to the system of doctrine or strikes
at the vitals of religion. When a stated difference violates this standard, it
is reason to deny ordination or to institute process aimed at removing his
ordination. ( _BCO_ 21-4).

In contrast, our Constitution does not contain any explicit standard by
which differences with our _Book of Church Order_ are to be judged. The
_BCO_, however, does imply a three-part inquiry by which such differences
should be judged. The first is whether the candidate expresses
willingness to operate in accordance with the prescriptions and limitations
imposed by the _Book of Church Order_ . The second is whether the
difference stated with the _Book of Church Order_ arises out of a matter of
theology addressed by our doctrinal standards. The third, in cases of
ordination, is whether the Presbytery is satisfied that a candidate’s stated
difference with the _Book of Church Order_ does not compromise the
credibility of his affirmation of the third ordination vow, “Do you
approve of the form of government and discipline of the Presbyterian
Church in America, in conformity with the general principles of Biblical
polity?” ( _BCO_ 21-5).

During a _Book of Church Order_ examination, the first inquiry is satisfied
by a candidate’s stated willingness to conduct his ministry in accordance
with the _Book of Church Order_ . The second inquiry, since it actually
raises an issue of doctrine arising out of a _BCO_ difference, should be
judged according to _BCO_ 21-4. The final inquiry, whether a candidate
can credibly affirm the third ordination vow, is a matter of judgment
reserved to the Presbytery itself. The fact that a candidate has
reservations or differences as to the practices established by our _Book of_
_Church Order_ is not a reason to deny ordination so long as this three-part
inquiry is satisfied.

**Presbytery did not err in licensing the candidate in this case**

A candidate for licensure is required to demonstrate basic knowledge of
the _Book of Church Order_ . ( _BCO_ 19-2, b-3). He is not, however, required
to make any personal affirmations regarding his approval of it.
Nevertheless, the licensure examination in this matter included specific
questioning concerning the candidate’s views as to the office of deacon

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=185 printed_page=183 -->

and whether there was Biblical support for the idea that a woman could
serve as a deacon. At the conclusion of the examination, the candidate
clearly affirmed his willingness to operate within the parameters required
by the _Book of Church Order_ .

solon gas a candidate for li censure expresses a willingness to operate in
accordance with the parameters established by our _Book of Church Order_,
he does not violate the standards of our Constitution by questioning
whether the provisions of the _Book of Church Order_ are contrary to
Scripture or sound judgment. Our _Book of Church Order_ is conclusive on
the question of whether women may be ordained to the office of deacon.
They may not. ( _BCO_ 7-2, 9-3). Since the candidate expressed his
willingness to operate in accordance with that form of government, the
Presbytery did not err in its decision to license him.

**Presbytery did not err in ordaining the candidate in this case**

Complainants in this case argue that the _Book of Church Order_
establishes more than the practices which we agree to operate under as a
church body. They claim that the provisions of the _Book of Church Order_
are doctrinal in nature and that differences with that doctrine must be
judged by the same standard as differences with our confessional
standards. To do so would seriously undermine both.

As stated above, our Constitution does not treat the doctrinal standards
and the _Book of Church Order_ as identical in the authority they exert or in
the standards by which conformity to each is to be determined. The
relative ease with which the _Book of Church Order_ may be amended, in
comparison to the doctrinal standards, is evidence that the provisions of
the _Book of Church Order_ are open to debate and discussion in a manner
that differs from our doctrinal standards. That some provisions of the
_Book of Church Order_ (office, ordination, the Sacraments, etc.) may
appear more “doctrinal” than others (calling of congregational meetings,
disposal of property, process by which trial are conducted) does not
change the way in which our Constitution addresses all aspects of the
_Book of Church Order_ .

where a candidate for ordination asserts a difference with the _Book of_
_Church Order_, our Constitutional standards implicitly require the
Presbytery to consider that difference under a three-part inquiry arising
out of the third ordination vow, “Do you approve of the form of
government and discipline of the Presbyterian Church in America, in
conformity with the general principles of Biblical polity?” ( _BCO_ 21-5,

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=186 printed_page=184 -->

vow 3). The first part of the inquiry, whether the candidate “approves” of
the _Book of Church Order_, is satisfied by a candidate’s stated willingness
to conduct his ministry within the parameters established by the _Book of_
_Church Order_ . [4] The second part of the inquiry is whether the stated
difference with the _BCO_ is, in fact, a difference with our doctrinal
standards. Finally, the third inquiry is whether the differences indicate
views held by the candidate that fail to conform to the general principles
of Biblical polity.

Thus, while a candidate may express his willingness to conduct his
ministry in accordance with the _Book of Church Order_ (satisfying the first
inquiry), the difference he expresses should also be examined as to
whether it raises an issue addressed by our doctrinal standards (the second
inquiry) and/or whether the stated difference may be so offensive to
general principles of Biblical polity that a Presbytery may rightly
conclude that he cannot credibly affirm the third ordination vow (the third
inquiry).

Further, a candidate’s stated differences with the _Book of Church Order_
may give rise to other reasons to challenge his ordination. For example, if
a member of a Presbytery, who during his examination for ordination
promised to follow the _BCO_ in spite of a personal reservation,
subsequently acts in contradiction to the requirement of the _BCO_ in this
or related provisions, the Presbytery is required to act to bring that
member’s practices into conformity with our Constitution. A promise to
act in accordance with the Constitution is obviously undermined by
subsequent activity that violates the Constitution. Similarly, where a
candidate asserts a view that differs with the _Book of Church Order_, the

4 F.P. Ramsay explains the common Southern Presbyterian understanding of the word
“approve” in the 3rd ordination vow as follows: “A gradation is noticeable: the
Scriptures are said to _be_ the word of God; the standards of doctrine are _adopted as_
_containing the scriptural system_ of doctrine; but the governmental standards are not
thus adopted, but the government and discipline are _approved._ In view of this
evidently intended difference, while the principles of doctrine underlying the
government and discipline, so far as set forth in the doctrinal standards, are covered
by the preceding question, yet the application of these principles, as set forth in the
_Book of Church Order_, are here only approved in the sense of agreed to as
regulations to be observed. But unless one can thus sincerely approve, being willing
to assume covenant obligations to carry out these provisions, he ought not to answer
this question affirmatively.” _An Exposition of the Form of Government and the Rules_
_of Discipline of the Presbyterian Church in the United States_ (Richmond: The
Presbyterian Committee of Publication, 1898), pp. 136-37.

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=187 printed_page=185 -->

Presbytery is free to challenge that candidate as to whether the
candidate’s view of Scripture is in accord with our system of doctrine.

Applying these standards to the case at hand, the candidate plainly
asserted his willingness to conduct his ministry in conformity with the
_Book of Church Order_ . We are required to give great deference to the
judgment of Presbytery on matters of discretion and judgment best
addressed by the court with familiar acquaintance with the events and
parties ( _BCO_ 39-3.3). In the absence of clear evidence that the candidate
intends to ordain women to the office of deacon, or that he does not
intend to encourage his congregation to nominate qualified men to the
office, or that he will refuse to ordain qualified men to the office of
deacon when women may not also be ordained, we are required to defer
to Presbytery’s judgment on this area of inquiry. Thus, the first part of the
required inquiry is satisfied.

We also find that the third inquiry, the credibility of his affirmation of the
third ordination vow has been satisfied on the basis of the record before
us. The candidate’s stated difference as to whether the Scriptures might
allow a woman to hold the office of deacon, in light of his asserted
willingness to conform to the practices required by the _BCO_, provides
sufficient evidence from which a Presbytery may rightly conclude that he
may credibly affirm the third ordination vow. In the absence of clear
evidence to the contrary, we are required to give great deference to the
judgment of Presbytery on matters of discretion and judgment best
addressed by the court with familiar acquaintance with the events and the
parties ( _BCO_ 39-3.3).

The final consideration is whether the candidate’s stated difference with
the _BCO_ raises an issue arising under our doctrinal standards. In the case
before us, the record shows that the candidate’s expressed difference
arose from exegetical concerns as to the proper interpretation of I
Timothy 3 and other Biblical texts. Although the Complainants note an
issue of Biblical fidelity in their brief, they have argued this matter
entirely under the presumption that a candidate’s difference with the _BCO_
with regard to matters of church office is and of itself, fatal. As we have
demonstrated, that position is mistaken. If the complainants wished to
argue that the candidate’s position violated our doctrinal standards, they
should have articulated to the Presbytery the provisions of our doctrinal
standards allegedly violated by the candidate’s views and demonstrated
the ways in which the candidate’s views violated those doctrinal

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=188 printed_page=186 -->

standards. They did not do so, and we therefore find that the Presbytery
did not err by approving the candidate for ordination.

Our _Book of Church Order_ is conclusive on the question of whether
women may be ordained to the office of deacon. They may not ( _BCO_ 72, 9-3). The candidate in this case expressed his willingness to operate in
accordance with that form of government, and we find no reason in the
record of the case not to defer to the Presbytery’s judgment that his
affirmation of Ordination Vow Three was credible.

For these reasons, we affirm the Presbytery’s actions and the Complaints
are denied.

A vote on SJC 2008-1 and 2008-10 was:
TE Dominic A. Aquila, Dissent TE William R. Lyle, Absent
TE Howell A. Burkhalter, Concur TE John M. McArthur, Jr., Concur
RE E. C. Burnett, Concur RE J. Grant McCabe, Absent
TE David F. Coffin Jr., Concur TE Charles E. McGowan, Absent
RE Marvin C. Culbertson, Concur TE D. Steven Meyerhoff, Absent
RE J. Howard Donahoe, Concur RE Frederick Neikirk, Absent
RE Samuel J. Duncan, Absent RE Steven T. O’Ban, Absent
TE Paul B. Fowler, Absent RE Calvin Poole, Concur
TE Grover E. Gunn III, Dissent TE G. Dewey Roberts, Concur
TE William W. Harrell Jr., Concur RE Olin L. Stubbs, Dissent
RE Terry L. Jones, Absent RE John B. White, Jr., Absent
RE Thomas F. Leopard, Concur

10 concur, 3 dissent, and 10 absent.

#### CONCURRING OPINION

**COMPLAINT OF CROSSROADS COMMUNITY CHURCH SESSION**

**AND**

**COMPLAINTS OF RE MARK A. GRASSO, ET AL**
**VS**

**PHILADELPHIA PRESBYTERY**

**SJC 2008-01 AND 2008-10**

We concur in the result reached by the majority and believe that the following
reasoning further clarifies the decision.

The fourth vow that members of the Standing Judicial Commission take is “I
will judge according to the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in America,

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=189 printed_page=187 -->

through my best efforts applied to nothing other than the record of the case
and other documents properly before me.”
_BCO_ 39-3 states:

. . . To insure that this Constitution is not amended, violated or
disregarded in judicial process, any review of the judicial proceedings of a
lower court by a higher court shall by guided by the following principles:

1. A higher court, reviewing a lower court, should limit itself to the
issues raised by the parties to the case in the original (lower) court.
Further, the higher court should resolve such issues by applying the
Constitution of the church, as previously established through the
constitutional process.

It is within the framework of this vow and principle that the Standing Judicial
Commission decided this case. In making our decisions, we are limited by
what the Constitution states and what it does not state, not on our wishes or
desires. This decision should not be construed or interpreted in any way as a
weakening of or deviation from _BCO_ 7-2, which states “[i]n accord with
Scripture, these offices [elder and deacon] are open to men only.”

Since the Constitution is silent as to some of the issues, views, beliefs, and
practices raised in the Complaint, the PCA would be served by amendments
to the Constitution being proposed that carefully and specifically address
many of beliefs and practices that are raised in the Complaint and that are of
concern to many throughout the PCA.

The Dissent in this case raises several points that are worthy of consideration,
i.e. the Candidate believes that women should be ordained as deacons, that
qualified men do not need to be ordained as deacons, and that women can be
“commissioned” as deacons and serve with men on the diaconate. Much of
the Majority Decision and the Dissent analyze how the Candidate would
conform his practices to the express terms of the Constitution and how that
would, or would not, be proper.

The Complainants and the Dissent argue that it is not clear in the Record what
some of the candidate’s views, beliefs, and practices are in regard to who
may, and may not, serve on a diaconate and how they would serve.

In this case, there were concerns about what was, and was not, in the Record.
It is this Record, upon which the Standing Judicial Commission must decide
the case.

One of the drawbacks of an ordination exam, such as the Candidate went
through in this case, is that it is difficult for the Clerk to accurately record all

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=190 printed_page=188 -->

of the questions and answers. Invariably, a critical question and answer will
be omitted from the Minutes, and thus not become a part of the Record.
Sometimes there might be a concern that questions and answers were not
correctly recorded in the Minutes. When this happens, the Standing Judicial
Commission cannot consider arguments that are not supported by the Record.

Otherwise stated, perhaps a complaint about a candidate’s ordination exam
may not be the most practical way to raise certain issues. This is especially
true when there is some uncertainty as to exactly what the views, beliefs, and
practices of the candidate are.

What would be the effect of the complaint being sustained? Would the man
suddenly be “unordained?” What would be the effect of any ecclesiastical
functions, such as baptisms or marriages, that he performed during this time?

It is within this context that we would suggest that the better way in this case,
and other cases where the views, beliefs, and practices of men are called into
question, would be for the party who is concerned about these views, beliefs,
and practices to make such inquiries as are necessary and practical to ascertain
exactly what these views, beliefs, and practices are; then, assuming they are
contrary to Scripture or our Constitution, formally file a Charge, pursuant to
_BCO_ 32-2 and 32-3. This procedure not only removes the question of
whether or not a strong presumption of guilt exists ( _BCO_ 31-2), but allows a
court to directly try the issue raised in the Charge. ( _BCO_ 32-3) Furthermore,
this procedure will require an accurate record of the questions and answers, in
that all testimony shall be recorded and become a part of the Record. ( _BCO_
35-7) This will eliminate the problem of not having a complete or accurate
Record upon which to judge and decide the case.

/s/ RE Samuel J. Duncan. /s/ TE William W. Harrell, Jr.

**DISSENT**

**COMPLAINT OF RE MARK GRASSO, ET AL**
**VS**

**PHILADELPHIA PRESBYTERY**

**SJC 2008-10**

SJC 2008-10 is a complaint alleging error on the part of Philadelphia
Presbytery in approving a candidate's ordination examination with the
following stated differences: his view that women should be ordained as
deacons, that qualified men do not need to be ordained as deacons, and that

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=191 printed_page=189 -->

women can be “commissioned” as deacons and serve with men on the

diaconate.

The Record shows that the candidate would acquiesce to the _BCO_ provision
that only men can be ordained to the office of deacon. Further, while the
candidate believes that women should be allowed to be ordained as deacons,
he also stated that he would not practice ordaining women as deacons since
the PCA _Book of Church Order_ clearly prohibits this. However, the Record is
not clear that he would proactively seek out qualified men to be ordained to
that office. Under Summary of Facts #5 in the majority opinion, the following
is stated, in part, from the Record:

February 20, 2008 - PP held a called meeting to complete Mr. Hsu’s
ordination examination. The minutes of that meeting at paragraph 08-0204 (ROC p. 79) include the following:
During the course of the examination, Mr. Hsu gave these answers:

- The candidate affirmed that he would not ordain women to the

office of deacon.

- The candidate stated that he would feel more comfortable with a
diaconal team (“Mercy Team”) comprised of men and women,
who are not ordained.

- As the candidate understands the _BCO_, in the absence of deacons,
the role of deacons falls upon the elders, and a ministry team
composed of men and women are permitted to assist the deacons
in their ministry (9-7)

- The candidate stated that if the session of the church that the

candidate is called to ordains men deacons, he would submit to
this.

What complainants alleged is that conducting one's ministry under the
provisions of the _BCO_ and affirming the third ordination vow do not only
require a refusal to ordain women as deacons but also require an affirmative
willingness to seek the nomination of qualified men, to train these men, and,
if elected by the congregation, to ordain them to the office of deacon (“Those
who have been called to office in the Church are to be inducted by the
ordination of a court,” _BCO_ 17-1).

A critical question in the complaint is not simply the candidate's promise not
to ordain women as deacons, but whether he also will ordain men, and
whether he will lead a session and congregation to understand the importance
of ordaining men to the office of deacon. a willingness to operate in
accordance with the prescriptions and limitations imposed by the _BCO_ means
that one will ordain men to the office of deacon and will lead the congregation

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=192 printed_page=190 -->

in seeking to recognize such men. A PCA officer who affirms that he will not
ordain women to the office of deacon, but then also stipulates that he would
not ordain men to the office of deacon until he is free to ordain women to that
office as well, or does so only if compelled to do so by his session, or who
would not encourage his congregation to seek qualified men for the office, is
not operating in accordance with the prescriptions and limitations imposed by
the _BCO_ .

The complainants argued in their brief that the candidate was less than clear
that he would proactively ordain qualified men as deacons. Their perspective
regarding the ordination examination at the Presbytery meeting and the
written Record raise sufficient questions that the SJC had the right to rule that
operating in accordance with the prescriptions and limitations imposed by the
_BCO_ involves ordaining male deacons if qualified men are available. It is not
enough to say that all a candidate has to do is promise not to ordain women;
he also has to promise to practice the provisions of the _BCO_ . At the very least,
subjection to the brethren requires that he follow and maintain this promise.
We agree with the majority opinion that the candidate’s view on women
serving as ordained deacons is a rejection of a general principle of biblical
polity to which certain _BCO_ requirements conform but that this particular
denial does not necessarily strike at the vitals of religion.

There are two important questions regarding the complaint. The first is the
third ordination vow as it relates to the candidate’s agreement with the general
principles of biblical polity with which the provisions of the _BCO_ conform. A
presbytery should not approve a candidate’s ordination examination if the
presbytery judges that the candidate has a stated difference with the _BCO_
which is a rejection of either (1) a fundamental of our system of doctrine
which is also addressed in the Westminster Standards or (2) a general
principle of biblical polity, the denial of which strikes at the vitals of religion.
We agree with the majority opinion’s acknowledgement of the right and the
means by which a Presbytery is to judge stated differences with the _BCO_ . The
#### majority opinion stated a three-part inquiry twice:

_The_ _Book of Church Order_, however, does imply a three-part inquiry
by which such differences should be judged. The first is whether
the candidate expresses willingness to operate in accordance with
the prescriptions and limitations imposed by the _Book of Church_
_Order_ . The second is whether the difference stated with the _Book_
_of Church Order_ arises out of a matter of theology addressed by
our doctrinal standards. The third, in cases of ordination, is whether

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=193 printed_page=191 -->

the Presbytery is satisfied that a candidate’s stated difference with
the _Book of Church Order_ does not compromise the credibility of
his affirmation of the third ordination vow. . . .

And later in the Reasoning and Opinion the majority states again:

where a candidate for ordination asserts a difference with the
_Book of Church Order_, our Constitutional standards implicitly
require the Presbytery to consider that difference under a threepart inquiry arising out of the third ordination vow, “Do you
approve of the form of government and discipline of the
Presbyterian Church in America, in conformity with the general
principles of Biblical polity?” ( _BCO_ 21-5, vow 3). The first part
of the inquiry, whether the candidate “approves” of the _Book of_
_Church Order_, is satisfied by a candidate’s stated willingness to
conduct his ministry within the parameters established by the _Book_
_of Church Order_ . The second part of the inquiry is whether the
stated difference with the _BCO_ is, in fact, a difference with our
doctrinal standards. Finally, the third inquiry is whether the
differences indicate views held by the candidate that fail to
conform to the general principles of Biblical polity.

The third ordination vow focuses on a candidate's position on the form of
government and discipline of the PCA. The corresponding ordination vow in
the PCUS asked only if the candidate approved the government and discipline
of the PCUS. This appears to have been only a commitment to abide by that
form of government and discipline in practice.

However, when the PCA adopted its _BCO_ it added a further stipulation to this
vow: “Do you approve of the form of government and discipline of the PCA,
_in conformity with the general principles of Biblical polity_ ?” (emphasis
added). This form of the vow requires more than a willingness to follow the
form of government and discipline in practice, it also requires an
acknowledgment that this form of government and discipline is an application
of certain general principles taught in the Bible. If a candidate for ordination
has answered the first ordination vow regarding the Scriptures in the
affirmative, then he is acknowledging that these general principles of polity
are taught in the Bible, and implies that he agrees with them. A Presbytery is
to judge agreement with these general principles just as it judges agreement
with the system of doctrine contained in the Westminster Confession of Faith
and Catechisms. Disagreement with some of these principles may strike at the
vitals of religion, and disagreement with others may not; this is what a
Presbytery must judge.

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=194 printed_page=192 -->

This understanding of the third ordination vow is consistent with the
declaration made in the PCA Constitution: “The _Confession of Faith_ and the
_Larger_ and _Shorter Catechisms_ of the Westminster Assembly, together with
the formularies of government, discipline, and worship are accepted by the
Presbyterian Church in America as standard expositions of the teachings of
Scripture in relation to both faith and practice” ( _BCO_ 29-1). Both the
formulations in the Confession and Catechisms as well as those in the _BCO_
are defined “as standard expositions of the teachings of Scripture.” Thus, a
Presbytery has the right and duty to evaluate a candidate's views in light of
the PCA's exposition of Scripture as expressed in the _BCO_ a swell a sin the
Westminster Standards.

a presbytery should hold a candidate to his ordination vow that he acknowledges
that the requirements of the _BCO_ are applications of certain biblical principles
of polity and that some of these biblical principles of polity are fundamentals
of our system. The candidate does not have to agree that all of the applications
of these principles in the _BCO_ are the best possible applications in every
particular; he only has to agree to abide by them. He is free, if he desires, to
propose amendments to the _BCO_ seeking to implement other applications. But
a candidate for ordination is not free to disagree with every single general
principle of biblical polity to which the requirements and provisions of the
_BCO_ conform.

This dissent is also concerned with a second important question: The willingness
of both the candidate for licensure and the candidate for ordination to operate
in accordance with the prescriptions and limitations imposed by the _Book of_
_Church Order_ . This is the first of the three inquiries mentioned in the majority
opinion related to the _BCO_ and the third ordination vow. This second critical
question also relates to the third and fourth licensure vows.

With regard to the case at hand, the candidate asserted his willingness to
conduct his ministry in conformity with the _Book of Church Order_, although
the Record does not indicate all the specifics implied by this general assertion.
In this general assertion, and from some of the statements in the Record, the
candidate seemed to indicate that he preferred not to ordain men as deacons,
unless compelled by his Session, even while stating that he would not ordain
women as deacons. The Record seems to indicate that the candidate affirmed
that he interprets relevant _BCO_ provisions to allow for the establishing of a
gender egalitarian, quasi-ordained, quasi-diaconate elected by the
congregation as a deliberate and permanent substitute for the diaconate as
defined by the _BCO_ . Further, the candidate's affirmation did not stipulate that
he would not practice “commissioning” women as deacons and allow them to
serve on a diaconate along with ordained male deacons.

<!-- PAGE ga=37 pdf_page=195 printed_page=193 -->

This dissent acknowledges that if the issue in this case had been framed
differently we and the majority in this decision would concur that a candidate
for ordination would be found out of accord with the third ordination vow if
he did not affirm the following: (1) that the office of deacon is an “ordinary
and perpetual office of the church” (e.g., BCO 1-4, 4-2, 7-2); (2) that he
would proactively and exclusively train, nominate and ordain qualified men
as deacons; (3) that only men can be elected by the congregation and be
ordained to serve on the Board of Deacons; and (4) that women are not
eligible to be elected as deacons, they are not to be commissioned as deacons,
and they are not to serve on the Board of Deacons with men.

This dissent believes the SJC ruled incorrectly on this complaint and it should
have been sustained.

/s/ TE Dominic Aquila /s/ TE Grover E. Gunn III /s/ RE Olin Stubbs

---

[← Judicial case index](../index/CASES.md)
